**Bert-Jaap Koops homepage - Crypto Law Survey**

# Overview per country {#overview-per-country align="center"}

**Version 27.0, February 2013**\
**© Bert-Jaap Koops**\
Licensed under Creative Commons Attribution Share Alike 4.0 International.
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0


Please do not bookmark or link to this page, but refer to the [main
page](../index.htm) instead.\
\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Wassenaar Arrangement]{#co} / COCOM \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 1, 5\]

### 1. Export/ import controls

#### **COCOM**

COCOM (Coordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls) was an
international organization for the mutual control of the export of
strategic products and technical data from country members to proscribed
destinations. It maintained, among others, the International Industrial
List and the International Munitions List. In 1991, COCOM decided to
allow export of mass-market cryptographic software (including public
domain software). Most member countries of COCOM followed its
regulations, but the United States maintained separate regulations.

Its 17 members were Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France,
Germany, Greece, Italy, Japan, Luxemburg, The Netherlands, Norway,
Portugal, Spain, Turkey, United Kingdom, and the United States.
Cooperating members included Austria, Finland, Hungary, Ireland, New
Zealand, Poland, Singapore, Slovakia, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland,
and Taiwan.

The main goal of the COCOM regulations was to prevent cryptography from
being exported to \"dangerous\" countries - usually, the countries
thought to maintain friendly ties with terrorist organizations, such as
Libya, Iraq, Iran, and North Korea. Exporting to other countries is
usually allowed, although states often require a license to be granted.

COCOM was dissolved in March 1994. Pending the signing of a new treaty,
most members of COCOM agreed in principle to maintain the status quo,
and cryptography remained on export control lists.

#### [Wassenaar]{#Wassenaar} Arrangement

The Wassenaar Arrangement controls the export of weapons and of dual-use
goods, that is, goods that can be used both for a military and for a
civil purpose; cryptography is such a dual-use good.

In 1995, 28 countries decided to establish a follow-up to COCOM, the
*Wassenaar Arrangement on Export Controls for Conventional Arms and
Dual-Use Goods and Technologies*. The negotiations on the Arrangement
were finished in July 1996, and the agreement was signed by 31 countries
(Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Romania, the Russian Federation, the
Slovak Republic, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, the United Kingdom
and the United States). Later, Bulgaria and Ukraine also became a
participating state to the Arrangement.

The initial provisions were largely the same as old COCOM regulations.
The General Software Note (applicable until the December 1998 revision)
excepted mass-market and public-domain crypto software from the
controls. Australia, France, New Zealand, Russia, and the US deviated
from the GSN and controlled the export of mass-market and public-domain
crypto software. Export via the Internet did not seem to be covered by
the regulations.

There is a personal-use exemption, allowing export of products
\"accompanying their user for the user\'s personal use\" (e.g., on a
laptop).

In September 1998, Wassenaar negotiations in Vienna did not lead to
changes in the crypto controls, although it was apparently considered to
restrict the GSN and possibly also to ease controls for key-recovery
crypto.

The Wassenaar Arrangement was revised in December 1998. Negotiations
were held on 2 and 3 December 1998 in Vienna, which resulted in
restrictions on the General Software Note and in some relexations:

-   free for export are: all symmetric crypto products of up to 56 bits,
    all asymmetric crypto products of up to 512 bits, and all
    subgroup-based crypto products (including elliptic curve) of up to
    112 bits;
-   mass-market symmetric crypto software and hardware of up to 64 bits
    are free for export (the 64-bit limit was deleted on 1 December
    2000, see below);
-   the export of products that use encryption to protect intellectual
    property (such as DVDs) is relaxed;
-   export of all other crypto still requires a license.

There was no change in the provisions on public-domain crypto, so that
all public-domain crypto software is still free for export. Nothing was
said about electronic exports (e.g., via the Internet), which
consequently remain unclear.

In its meeting of 30 November-1 December 2000, the Wassenaar states
lifted the 64-bit limit for export controls on mass-market crypto
software and hardware (in the Cryptography Note, clause d. (the 64-bit
limit) was deleted in its reference to category 5A2, as well as the
related Validity Note, see the
[summary](http://www.wassenaar.org/list/Summary.html)). The [public
statement](http://www.wassenaar.org/docs/press_5.html) of the meeting
mentioned that \"Participating States recognised that it is important to
continue deepening Wassenaar Arrangement understanding of how and how
much to control\" intangible transfers.

The Wassenaar provisions are not directly applicable: each member state
has to implement them in national legislation for them to have effect.
(In the entries below, I have included mention of the pre-December 1998
regulations, which will stay into effect until the government enacts new
legislation to implement the Wassenaar changes.)

See the [Wassenaar
List](http://www.wassenaar.org/list/Table%20of%20Contents%20-%2099web.html)
(crypto is in category 5 part 2). See further the [Wassenaar
Arrangement](http://www.wassenaar.org) page (includes contact
information for various national export control authorities), a
[Wassenaar FAQ](http://www.bis.doc.gov/Wassenaar/WASSFAQs.htm) (by US
BIS), Greg Broiles\' [page on the Wassenaar
Arrangement](http://www.parrhesia.com/wassenaar/), which includes links
to [John Young\'s](http://www.jya.com/wassenr3.htm) pages on the
Wassenaar Arrangement and [comments](http://jya.com/wass-talk.htm) on
the December 1998 changes, and the [GILC Wassenaar
page](http://www.gilc.org/crypto/wassenaar/). See also Chapter 3 of
Simo-Pekka Parviainen\'s
[thesis](http://ethesis.helsinki.fi/julkaisut/oik/julki/pg/parviainen/)
on Cryptographic Software Export Controls in the EU. Cf. an April 1996
[article](http://www.dfat.gov.au/isecurity/pd/pd_4_96/pd10.html) on the
Wassenaar Arrangement.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Council of Europe]{#coe} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**2. Domestic laws and regulations\
**On 23 November 2001, the Council of Europe adopted the [Convention on
Cybercrime](http://conventions.coe.int/Treaty/EN/findknownste.asp?CM=1)
\[search for convention 185\] (see the
[text](http://conventions.coe.int/Treaty/en/Treaties/Html/185.htm) and
[Explanatory
Report](http://conventions.coe.int/Treaty/en/Reports/Html/185.htm)).
The Convention deals with substantive and procedural criminal law. \
Article 18 contains a production order: \"Each party shall adopt such
legislative and other measures as may be necessary to empower its
competent authorities to order: a). a person in its territory to submit
specified computer data in that person\'s possession or control, which
is stored in a computer system of a computer-data storage medium\".
Para. 176 of the Explanatory Memorandum adds that \"Parties could
establish obligations that the specified computer data (\...) must be
produced in the manner specified in the order. This could include
reference (\...) to form, such as that the data or information be
provided in \'plain text\' (\...).\" Hence, the convention allows, but
does not oblige, party states to create a decryption order.\
Section 62 of the [Explanatory
Memorandum](http://conventions.coe.int/treaty/EN/projets/CyberRapex.htm)
specifies the clause \"without right\" that is used in describing
several offences the treaty penalises. It explicitly states that
encryption \"should in principle be considered a legitimate protection
of privacy and, therefore, be considered as being undertaken with
right\". So, encryption can not be outlawed by party states, although
the phrase \"in principle\" allows for a certain margin of appreciation.

The Convention was signed on 23 November 2001 by 26 of the 43 CoE Member
States, as well as by Canada, Japan, South Africa and the United States
(who participated in the drafting process). Later, several states
followed. As soon as 5 countries have ratified the convention, it will
enter into force. (As of 8 January 2004, four countries had ratified.)
The convention will not be directly applicable, but will have to be
implemented by party states in their national laws. See the [list of
signatures and
ratifications](http://conventions.coe.int/Treaty/EN/searchsig.asp?NT=185&CM=&DF=)
for the current status of the convention.  

*History of the Convention\
*A Committee of Experts on Crime in Cyber-Space (PC-CY) was established
in January 1997, and published a first [draft
text](http://conventions.coe.int/treaty/en/projets/cybercrime.htm) for
discussion on 27 April 2000 (version 19). The Assembly of the CoE
approved a further draft on 24 April 2001, and a new [version (no.
27)](http://conventions.coe.int/treaty/EN/projets/cybercrime27.htm) was
published on 25 May 2001 (CDPC (2001) 2 rev). 

The production order was earlier included in article 14 of the draft
(version 19). Article 14, section 5 read: \"Each Party shall take such
legislative and other measures as may be necessary to empower its
competent authorities to order for the purposes of criminal
investigations and proceedings any person who has knowledge about the
functioning of the computer system or measures applied to secure the
computer data therein to provide all necessary information, as is
reasonable, to enable the undertaking of the measures referred to in
paragraphs 1 \[search\] and 4 \[seizure\].\"\
The \"measures applied to secure the computer data\" included
cryptography. It was not quite clear whether the provision included a
decryption order. Given the purpose of the seizure power of article 14,
section 4 (\"to seize or similarly secure computer data accessed (\...)
in view of their possible use in criminal investigations and
proceedings\"), one might infer that section 5 should be read as
requiring persons to provide decryption information that enable the use
of seized encrypted data in criminal proceedings. Admittedly, the text
was a bit muddy here.\
The text refers only to criminal investigation, not to national security
purposes. Since section 7 refers to the \"conditions and safeguards
under national law\", states must respect the privilege against
self-incrimination, which is incorporated in article 6 of the European
Convention on Human Rights and hence should be respected in national
laws. Consequently, states should not require suspects to decrypt.

Earlier on, key escrow may have been considered in the draft convention.
According to the 25 November 1998
[minutes](http://www.echo.lu/legal/en/lab/981125/minutes.html#9) of the
EU\'s Legal Advisory Board, it was unclear \"whether the convention will
contain any provisions on escrow of encryption algorithms\". The current
text does not contain anything to suggest key escrow.

**3. Developments in cryptography regulation**\
The Council of Europe (a 46-member intergovernmental organisation, whose
treaties are not directly applicable in national law), in its
[Recommendation R (95) 13 Concerning Problems of Criminal Procedure Law
Connected with Information
Technology](http://www.privacy.org/pi/intl_orgs/coe/info_tech_1995.html)
of 11 September 1995, stated that \"measures should be considered to
minimise the negative effects of the use of cryptography on the
investigation of criminal offenses, without affecting its legitimate use
more than is strictly necessary.\" The recommendation itself does not
state *which* measures should be taken or *how* the \"balance must be
found\" in the \"conflict of interests between the needs of the users
and law enforcement\".

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [European Union]{#eu} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 5, 7, 8\]

[**1. Export/ import controls**\
Export of dual-use goods, including cryptography, is regulated by the
*Council Regulation (EC) No 1334/2000 setting up a Community regime for
the control of exports of dual-use items and technology* (*Official
Journal* L159, 30.1.2000), in force since 29 September 2000 \[see also
the Corrigendum, *Official Journal* 2000/176, 15.07.2000\]. This
replaces the earlier 1994 Council Regulation (see below). The Regulation
was amended by Council Regulation]{#eu_exp} (EC) [No
458/2001](http://www.dti.gov.uk/export.control/pdfs/councilregulations.pdf)
of 6 March 2001, OJ 7 March 2001, L65/19 (deleting the 64-bit limit for
symmetric mass-market crypto, see under [Wassenaar](#Wassenaar)), by
Council Regulation (EC) [No
2432/2001](http://www.dti.gov.uk/export.control/pdfs/dual-use-regulation-1101.pdf)
\[beware: large document\] of 20 November 2001, the  Annexes of which
replaced the Annexes to the 2000 Regulation (and by Council Regulation
(EC) [No
880/2002](http://www.dti.gov.uk/export.control/pdfs/8802002.pdf) of 27
May 2002, OJ 29 May 2002, L 139/7, which is not relevant to crypto
controls). The EU regulations follow the [Wassenaar](#Wassenaar)
Arrangement.\
In general, export within the EU is liberalised, and remaining export
licensing procedures are simplified.

-   Export to *other EU countries* is entirely liberalised, with the
    exception of some highly specialised products, such as cryptanalysis
    items. For these items, member states can issue General
    Intra-Community Licenses valid for export to one or more determined
    EU countries, provided basic requirements are met, such as a
    statement of the end use of exported items. For re-exports after
    intra-EU export, an information-exchange mechanism is established.
-   For export to *Australia, Canada, Japan, New Zealand, Norway,
    Switzerland and the US*, a Community General Export Authorisation
    (CGEA) can be applied for, which is valid for export from all EU
    countries.
-   For export to *other countries*. a General National License can be
    applied for (except for cryptanalysis items), which are valid for
    export to one particular country. Otherwise, exporters have to apply
    for an individual license. For mass-market crypto software and
    hardware

**Former regulation**\
The December 1994 EU Council Regulation (EC) No. 3381/94 (amended by
Regulation (EC) 837/95 of 10 April 1995) and EU Council Decision No.
94/942/CFSP (amended by Council Decision 98/232/CFSP and EU Council
Decision 1999/193/GASP), in force since July 1995, regulated the export
of dual-use goods, including cryptography. (According to two judgements
of October 1995 by the European Court of Justice, the European Community
has exclusive jurisdiction in these matters (art. 113 EC Treaty)
\[source: Swedish government communication 1998/99:116\].)

In general, a license was needed for the export of crypto hardware and
software outside of the EU, with the exception of mass-market and
public-domain software. For a transitional period, the Regulation also
required a licence procedure for intra-Community trade of encryption
products. Export to seven \"friendly\" countries (Australia, Canada,
Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Switzerland, USA) seemed to be less
restricted.

The October 1997 Communication of the European Commission *Towards A
European Framework for Digital Signatures And Encryption* ([see
below](#EC%20Framework)) noticed that the Dual-Use Regulation left room
for national implementation and that, consequently, \"a large variety of
domestic licensing schemes and practices exist. These divergences can
lead to distortion of competition.\" The Commission was of the opinion
that the Dual-Use Regulation should be adapted in view of the
requirements of the cryptography market. It advised to:

-   progressively dismantle intra-Community controls on commercial
    encryption products (i.e. not necessarily for very advanced
    encryption);
-   launch a discussion on the scope and interpretation of certain
    provisions, such as the General Software Note (stipulating that
    public-domain software is not subject to controls);
-   deal with problems like intangible means of transmission (such as
    fax or email).

The EU discussed the December 1998 changes in the Wassenaar Arrangement
in order to implement them. ([Denmark](http://jya.com/wass-dk.htm) might
not approve of the new Wassenaar regulations.) By Council Decision
1999/193/GASP (Pub. EG Nr. L73) of 9 March 1999, in force since 18 April
1999, the export list of goods was amended. Then, mass-market crypto
could be exported within the EU on a general license, without
restrictions on key length.

The dual-use regulation was to be replaced by a new regulation by 1
January 1999, according to the *Proposal for a Council Regulation (EC)
setting up a Community regime for the control of exports of dual-use
goods and technology*, COM(1998)257final (*Official Journal* 21 December
1998, 98/C 399/01). According to the proposal, the present regime had
not sufficiently stimulated a convergence of national policies and
practices; it was complex and \"too cumbersome to be useful in
practice\". The main change for cryptography would be that for exporting
crypto products within the EU, export licenses would be replaced by a
simple notification. Also, the controls would now also include export
through intangible means. Eventually, the new regulation was not decided
upon until 22 June 2000.

See for an overview of EU export controls Simo-Pekka Parviainen\'s
[thesis](http://ethesis.helsinki.fi/julkaisut/oik/julki/pg/parviainen/)
on Cryptographic Software Export Controls in the EU, and the [documents
page](http://www.dti.gov.uk/export.control/legislation/ecreg.htm) at
UK\'s DTI. 

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
The European Council [Resolution of 17 January 1995 on the lawful
interception of telecommunications
(96/C329/01)](http://www.privacy.org/pi/activities/tapping/eu_tap_resolution_1995.html)
contains a requirement for network operators and service providers, if
they use encryption, to provide intercepted communications to
law-enforcement agencies \"en clair\" (which I interpret as meaning to
provide the signal as they received it, since they cannot undo
encryption by users).

**3. Developments in cryptography regulation**\
The draft *Green Book on the Security of Information Systems* (Draft
4.0, 18 October 1993), which has not been officially adopted by the
European Council, poses a case for the provision of \"Public
Confidentiality Services\" (which would offer some sort of Government
Access to Keys).

In 1996 and 1997, the European Commission was working on a draft
proposal on the establishment of a Europe-wide network of Trusted Third
Party Services (ETS). The network would be established for providing
certification services by private TTP\'s. Although primarily meant for
establishing an infrastructure for the use of public key encryption, the
proposal might also try to address the legal access problem, e.g.,
through key recovery. The studies conducted did not address key recovery
in-depth, but concentrated on issues related to establishing a
public-key infrastructure for digital signatures. The Report on the
results of 1995 TTP projects said that key recovery systems \"can
potentially provide at least part of the answer to the problems raised
by confidentiality functions.\" These \"should be investigated as a
matter of priority, in order to complete the picture of TTP
functionality.\" See the [Infosec
homepage](http://www.cordis.lu/infosec/) and [European Trusted Services
preparatory studies](http://www.cordis.lu/infosec/src/prep.htm). [See
also the]{#bonn} [KRISIS pilot
project](http://www.seven77.demon.co.uk/krisis/).

The 6-8 July 1997 Global Information Networks Conference [Bonn
Ministerial Declaration](http://www2.echo.lu/bonn/final.html) of
European Ministers (from the European Union, EFTA, Central and Eastern
Europe, and Cyprus) echoes the [OECD guidelines](#oecd). It recognizes
the importance of strong cryptography, and declares that crypto products
should be available internationally and users should have free choice,
subject to applicable law. Measures to safeguard lawful access should be
proportionate and effective. Like the OECD guidelines, this leaves ample
room for interpretation (pro or con key recovery). []{#EC Framework}

The European Union has adopted a [Green Paper on Legal Protection for
Encrypted Services in the Single
Market](http://europa.eu.int/en/record/green/gp9603/index.htm), a
discussion proposal on protecting services which are encrypted to ensure
payment of a fee (such as pay television and video-on-demand). The Green
Paper considers proposing a harmonization of national laws to prohibit
the manufacture, sale, importation, possession, and promotion of illicit
decoders, as well as unauthorized decoding. On 9 July 1997, the European
Commission proposed legislation ([directive COM (97)
356](http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/~mgk25/ca-law/COM-97-356.pdf) (in pdf)) to
this purpose, which would also include online services with conditional
access. Some cryptographers have voiced concern that the proposal might
curb cryptanalytic research. See also Markus Kuhn\'s [critical
page](http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/~mgk25/ca-law/) on the subject.

With the release in October 1997 of the Communication from the
Commission [Towards A European Framework for Digital Signatures And
Encryption](http://www.ispo.cec.be/eif/policy/97503toc.html), COM (97)
503, the European Commission has chosen a direction away from key
recovery. Building on its April 1997 Communication on Electronic
Commerce, this communication aims at creating a reliable European
framework for digital signatures. It also addresses confidentiality
crypto policy. It stresses the economic and societal importance of
cryptography: \"the public needs to have access to technical tools
allowing effective protection of the confidentiality of data and
communication against arbitrary intrusions. Encryption of data is very
often the only effective and cost-efficient way of meeting these
requirements.\" The Commission is concerned that restrictions on
encryption affect the right to privacy, its effective exercise and the
harmonisation of data protection laws in the Internal Market. Also,
\"divergence between regulatory schemes might result in obstacles to the
functioning of the Internal Market.\"

The Commission is wary of key recovery issues. \"Key escrow or key
recovery raise a number of practical and complex questions that policy
makers would need to solve, in particular issues of privacy,
vulnerability, effectiveness and costs. If at all required, regulation
should be limited to what is absolutely necessary. Regulation would also
need to distinguish between a multitude of possible key types (storage
keys, session keys, authentication keys, etc.).\" The Commission will
examine whether national restrictions are totally or partially
justified, notably whether they are proportionate, taking into account
the provisions on the free circulation of goods in the Internal Market,
and the requirements of the Data Protection Directive. Also, regulations
should distinguish authentication services from confidentiality
services. The Commission invites the Council of the European Union to
initiate a debate on encryption issues. (In its [Ninth
Report](http://www.parliament.the-stationery-office.co.uk/pa/cm199798/cmselect/cmeuleg/155ix/el0924.htm),
the Select Committee on European Legislation considered that this
Communication does \"not raise questions of legal or political
importance\".)

At the [RSA Data Security
Conference](http://www.news.com/News/Item/0,4,18079,00.html), January
1998, Detlef Eckhert of the European Commission (DGXIII) said that no
regulation is planned for the EU.

EU ministers of Justice and Home Affairs were reported to have agreed
that law enforcement agencies must have access to keys or plaintext, at
a conference in Birmingham, January 1998. The UK prepared a policy paper
for the EU in February 1998, stating that it may be necessary for law
enforcement to have lawful access in certain circumstances, which may be
either overt (i.e., demanding decryption) or covert (probably through
key recovery). The Council of Ministers, on 28 May 1998, decided to
monitor closely the use of cryptography by serious criminals and
terrorists; it recognised the promotion of key escrow as a possible
approach to meet law-enforcement needs. Also, law-enforcement agencies
may require access to decryption keys necessary to decrypt seized
material. The Council agreed to prepare a Resolution on Encryption and
Law Enforcement \[source: Swedish government communication
1998/99:116\].

ETSI (European Telecommunications Standardisation Institute) worked on a
standard for Trusted Third Parties. Part of the standard would relate to
lawful access to encrypted data. Great Britain was reported to have
pushed here for its Royal Holloway scheme (for key escrow) to be used as
a basis, but in early 1998, an interim draft to this purpose was
rejected by ETSI.

More recently, several other EU documents call for wider use of
encryption as a tool to protect European citizens. The [Draft
report](http://www.europarl.eu.int/tempcom/echelon/pdf/prechelon_en.pdf)
of the Temporary Committee on the Echelon Interception System of 18 May
2001 recommends \"appropriate measures to promote, develop and
manufacture European encryption technology and software and above all to
support projects aimed at developing user-friendly open-source
encryption software\" and \"The European institutions and the public
administrations of the Member States are called upon systematically to
encrypt e-mails, so that ultimately encryption becomes the norm.\"\
The Commission Communication on Improving the Security of Information
Infrastructures and Combating Computer-related Crime of 26 January 2001,
COM(2000) 890 final, affirms that the Commission will promote \"the
availability of products and services with an appropriate level of
security and encouragement of a more liberalised use of strong
encryption through a dialogue amongst all interested parties.\" The
draft Proposal for a Recommendation on security of infrastructures and
combating computer-related crime of 18 June 2001 calls for promoting
\"European research in encryption software to improve the possibility of
self-defence by consumers\".

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development)]{#oecd} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**3. Developmentsin cryptography regulation**\
The OECD released its [Recommendation of the Council concerning
Guidelines for Cryptography
Policy](http://www.oecd.org/dsti/sti/it/secur/prod/e-crypto.htm) on 27
March 1997. The guidelines are non-binding recommendations to Member
governments, meaning that they will not be part of international law.
The Guidelines provide principles which states should take into account
and balance in developing a national crypto policy. The principles are:

1.  Trust in cryptographic methods
2.  Choice of cryptographic methods
3.  Market driven development of cryptographic methods
4.  Standards for cryptographic methods
5.  Protection of privacy and personal data
6.  Lawful access
7.  Liability
8.  International co-operation

The principles should be seen as \"interdependent and should be
implemented as a whole so as to balance the various interests at stake.
No principle should be implemented in isolation from the rest.\"

Some have welcomed the OECD principles as a victory for privacy over
US-pushed key recovery, while others object to certain points as being
too inflexible or too vague. Although the guidelines do not endorse key
recovery, they do not prohibit it either. In fact, the guidelines are
vague enough to allow a broad range of interpretation, and states will
be able to choose a privacy-oriented or a law-enforcement-driven policy
line as they see fit. While the guidelines recommend states to cooperate
to coordinate their crypto policies, one may be skeptical about the
chances of governments coming to an agreement; after all, within the
OECD, states have not been able to agree, and they have left the task of
finding a balance between, roughly speaking, information security/
privacy and law-enforcement/ national security to individual states.

Cf. Stewart Baker\'s [analysis of and comments on the OECD
guidelines](http://www.steptoe.com/comment.htm).

The process of discussing and drafting policy guidelines started with an
[Ad-hoc Meeting of Experts on Cryptography
Policy](http://www.us.net/~steptoe/276908.htm) on 18-19 December 1995,
organized by the OECD Committee for Information, Computer and
Communications Policy (ICCP). They proposed to make a study upon current
Member Countries encryption policies, market for encryption, key escrow
encryption, and to develop a cryptography policy guideline based on the
following principles, among others: provides security with confidence,
voluntary use, international perspective, recognise national
responsibilities, legally effective. The Group of Experts on Security,
Privacy and Intellectual Property Protection in the Global Information
Infrastructure held subsequent meetings on [7-8 February
1996](http://pandora.nla.gov.au/nph-arch/2000/Z2000-Aug-16/http://oecdconf/oecdconf.html)
in Canberra, on 8 May 1996 in Washington, DC, on 26-28 June in Paris,
and on 26-27 September 1996, again in Paris. At the June 1996 meeting,
according to one report, no agreement was established; the OECD was said
to be split into two parties, one with countries favouring mandatory key
escrow (notably the US, UK, and France), and one with countries opposing
this approach (mainly Japan and the Scandinavian countries). See a 1
October 1996 [press
release](http://www.epic.org/events/crypto_paris/releaseE_OECD.html).

One can compare the final version to an earlier [draft of the
Guidelines](http://www.ozemail.com.au/~firstpr/crypto/oecd_dr2.htm) that
was discussed at the December 1996 meeting (with rather optimistic
personal comments by Robin Whittle). (Text between \[square brackets\]
remained to be decided upon.) In January 1997, the OECD Group of Experts
on Security. Privacy, and Intellectual Property Protection in the GII
concluded the guidelines. The Guidelines were finally turned into a
Council of the OECD resolution in March 1997.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Business Government Forum]{#busigov} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls / 3. Developments in cryptography
regulation**\
On 19-20 December 1995, a meeting was held at the International Chamber
of Commerce in Paris, with governments, businesses and computer experts
attending. According to an ICC press release, the \"meeting ended in
agreement that \[encryption\] controls should be kept to a minimum,
consistent with the requirements of law enforcement and national
security\". Businesses agreed that independent trusted third parties
could hold deposited keys, to which governments are allowed access under
proper judicial warrant, provided sufficient safeguards are in place.
Some governments appeared willing to relax export controls on strong
cryptography as long as these safeguards applied. A second Business
Government Forum on Global Cryptography Policy was held on 7 May 1996 in
Washington, DC.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Antigua and Barbuda]{#ab} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
Art. 21(5)(c) of [Computer Misuse Bill,
2006](http://www.laws.gov.ag/bills/2006/computer-misuse-bill-2006.pdf)
contains a power to order people to provide decryption information. The
power can be executed by police officers who execute a warrant, in case
of offences defined in the Act or other offences disclosed while
executing powers based on the Act. The police officer also has the power
to access decryption information himself (art. 21(5)(a)(iii)).
Obstructing the police or failing to comply with the decryption order is
punishable with a fine of 15,000 dollars and/or two years\' imprisonment
(art. 21(6)). The Bill does not yet seem to have been enacted as of
January 2007, according to the [overview of
laws](http://www.laws.gov.ag/acts/index.html). 

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Argentina]{#ar} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
There are no import controls.

Argentina has signed the [Wassenaar](#Wassenaar) Arrangement, so export
controls should be regulated according to the pre-December 1998
Arrangement, including the General Software Note.

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
There are no controls on crypto use.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Australia]{#aus} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 1, 3, 5, 8\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
Export is regulated through the [Defence and Strategic Goods
List](http://www.dao.defence.gov.au/exportcontrols/dld_dsgl.html), last
changed in June 1999 according to the December 1998
[Wassenaar](#Wassenaar) Arrangement. This includes the General
Technology Note, exempting public-domain software from controls.
Mass-market software is regulated according to the Wassenaar limits.
There is a personal-use exemption (export is allowed for lawful
permanent residents, provided they keep control of the crypto and make
sure it is not transferred anywhere; a record must be kept for 3 years).

Before the 1999 implementation of Wassenaar, [export
regulations](http://iic.spirit.net.au/imat/publications/excontrl/excohome.htm)
of December 1996 (see Cat 5.doc) were in accordance with the
pre-December 1998 [Wassenaar](#Wassenaar) Arrangement, with the
exception of the General Software Note. Written permission was needed
for exporting cryptographic equipment designed to ensure the secrecy of
communications or stored information. Public-domain or generally
available crypto-software were included in the export controls (only
public-domain \"technology\" (i.e. specific information necessary for
the use of goods) was excluded).

Approval is also required for software that does not itself contain
cryptography, but which has an interface specially designed for plugging
in cryptography.

Crypto software transmitted electronically (e.g., over the Internet) was
apparently not controlled. In mid-1998, the Defence Department became
concerned that electronic exports were not covered by the controls, and
to counter this, they have apparently threatened to use the Weapons of
Mass Destruction Act. This in turn triggered a
[campaign](http://www.efa.org.au/Publish/PR980630.html) by Electronic
Frontiers Australia. After six months, the Defence Signals Directorate
determined that no license was required for an online mirror of PGPi,
provided that a warning is contained in the download page that the
downloader may infringe Australian export rules if he does not have
export approval; apparently, the burden of seeking a license is thus
shifted to the downloader rather than the person who makes software
available electronically.

Compare Nick Ellsmore\'s
[Cryptology](http://cryptome.org/crypto97-ne.htm) for background on the
Australian situation.

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
On 27 September 2001, the *Cybercrime Act,* No. 161, 2001, was passed,
based on the Council of Europe\'s (then draft) *[Convention on
Cybercrime](#coe)*. Item 12 of the law inserts a [section
3LA](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consol_act/ca191482/s3la.html)
in the Crimes Act 1914, that requires release of encryption keys or
decryption of encrypted data, upon a magistrate\'s order. The order may
be granted if there are reasonable grounds for suspecting evidential
material is held in or accessible from a computer, and the specified
person is a suspect or (an employee of) the owner or lessee of the
computer, who has relevant knowledge of the encryption. Failure to
comply with the order was initially punishable with up to six months\'
imprisonment; this was later raised to two years\' imprisonment. The
same power is granted in [section
201A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consol_act/ca1901124/s201a.html)
of the Customs Act 1901, which retains the maximum punishment of six
months\' imprisonment. Since the order can explicitly be given to
suspects, the privilege against self-incrimination ([section
128](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consol_act/ea199580/s128.html)
Evidence Act 1995) seems overruled by this statutory provision and hence
would not apply. In practice, the focus of s. 3LA seems to be on
non-suspects such as system administrators rather than suspects; for a
critical discussion of this addressing non-suspects to assist in law
enforcement, see James, Nickolas John (2004) Handing over the keys :
Contingency, power and resistance in the context of section 3LA of the
Australian Crimes Act 1914. *The University of Queensland Law Journal*,
*23* 1: 7-21.

**3. Developments in cryptography regulation**\
*Earlier developments\
* There has been an apparently unfounded rumour in the mid-1990s that
Australia was planning to restrict banks to Government Access to Keys.

At the [OECD meeting](#oecd) of December 1995, Australia expressed
little interest in the use of Trusted Third Parties for judicial access
to keys. Instead, the paper of the delegation suggested to require
suspects to decrypt in case of a warrant; this would require the rules
against self-incrimination to be adapted.

A 1996 [report by Gerard
Walsh](http://www.efa.org.au/Issues/Crypto/Walsh/), *Review of policy
relating to encryption technologies*, was barred from public release in
February 1997 by the Attorney-General\'s Department. After a freedom of
information request by Electronic Frontiers Australia (EFA), it was
released, and it is now available online at EFA. The main finding of the
Review was that major legislative action was not advised at the time to
safeguard national security and law-enforcement interests, although a
range of minor legislative and other actions were indicated (such as the
creation of an aggregate statute on intrusive investigative powers). The
review did not recommend specific options for encryption legislation at
the time. One action indicated was to consider establishing a further
and more serious category of offence where encryption is used to
obstruct government investigation into a criminal offence, and to
consider creating a power to require production of crypto keys (or other
recovery information). The review did not support mandatory key recovery
at that stage.

Compare Nick Ellsmore\'s
[Cryptology](http://cryptome.org/crypto97-ne.htm) for background on the
Australian situation.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Austria]{#au} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 1, 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
Export rules follow [EU](#eu_exp) regulations and the (pre-December
1998) [Wassenaar](#Wassenaar) Arrangement.

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
The *Betriebsfunkverordnung* forbade encryption in internal company and
organisation radio transmissions, but the [current
version](http://www.bmvit.gv.at/telekommunikation/recht/aut/verordnungen/bfv.html)
(in German) no longer seems to contain such a prohibition.

**3. Developments in cryptography regulation**\
no

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Bahrain]{#bh} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
Cryptography is not allowed in telecommunications networks using the
radio frequency spectrum. Section 50 of the 2002 Telecommunications Law
(see [unofficial
translation](http://www.ictregulationtoolkit.org/en/Document.1453.pdf))
stipulates that frequency license holders may not use secret signs or
codes in messages or conversations over their telecommunications network
in contravention of the regulations.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Bangladesh]{#ba} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
There seems to be no law restricting cryptography.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Belarus]{#by} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5, 7\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
Import and export of cryptography (coding equipment) is restricted
through
[Resolution](http://projects.sipri.se/expcon/natexpcon/Belarus/belcust.htm)
of the Council of Ministers of the Republic of Belarus No. 218 of 18
March 1997. One must obtain a license from the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs or the State Center for Information Security of the Security
Council..

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
According to the 21 August 1995 [decree N.
456](http://www.belarus.net/softinfo/catal_la/l00050.htm), for
application of cryptography means, a license is required by the State
Center for Information Security of the Security Council. For design,
production, sale, repair, and operation of cryptography, a license by
the Committee for State Security is needed. Cryptography use by business
people is restricted.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Belgium]{#be} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 1, 3, 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
Belgium requires a license for exporting cryptography outside of the
Benelux. Belgium has signed the [Wassenaar](#Wassenaar) Arrangement,
including the (pre-December 1998) General Software Note.

**2. Domestic laws and regulations\
Decryption order\
**The *Law on information-science crime* (*Wet van 28 november 2000
inzake informaticacriminaliteit / Loi du 28 Novembre relative à la
criminalité informatique*), [Belgisch Staatsblad / Moniteur
Belge](http://194.7.188.122/cgi/welcome.pl) 2001 - 298, of 28 November
2000 contains a decryption order (see the
[documents](http://www.lachambre.be/cgi-bin/docs.bat?l=n&dir=213) of the
Second Chamber, in Dutch and French). Article 9 creates a new provision
in the Code of Criminal Procedure, Art. 88*quater*. Para. 1 of art.
88quater allows an investigation judge (or others on his order) to order
someone whom he reasonably suspects to have special knowledge of
encryption services to give information on the working or the accessing
of the services or on how to decrypt (literally: how to get the data at
stake in intelligible form). Para. 2 of art. 88quater allows the
investigation judge to order any suitable person to decrypt herself,
within her possibility (lit.: to make accessible the data in the form
ordered by the judge).

Para. 2 stipulates that the order of para. 1 (to give the key or
password) cannot be given to suspects and people with a right to
non-disclosure. Although this seems to suggest, a contrario, that the
order of para. 2 (for the addressee to decrypt herself) *can* be given
to suspects, apparently the provision should be read that neither form
of the decryption order can be given to suspects. (The initial draft of
the law contained a provision in para. 2 that the order of para. 2 could
not be given to suspects, but that the order of para. 1 *could* be given
to suspects, since it was considered compatible with the privilege
against self-incrimination to hand over keys or passwords, referring to
the ECtHR case of *Saunders v. UK*. See *Wetsontwerp inzake
informaticacriminaliteit. Parl. St.* Kamer nrs 213/1 and 214/1,
Explanatory Memorandum, p. 27-28. At some point in the parliamentary
proceedings, the provision was changed; I have not been able to trace
when exactly, or why.)

A refusal of either order is punishable with 6 to 12 months\'
imprisonment and/or a fine of BEF26 to BEF20k. There is a secrecy duty
for professionally involved people. If the ordered persons
unintentionally cause damage to the system or data, the State is civilly
liable for this.

Article 12 of the same law has a more or less similar provision for
intercepted encrypted telecommunications, inserted as section 4 of art.
90*quater* of the Belgian CCP. Here there is no exception for suspects
or persons with a right to non-disclosure, presumably because the
provision apparently addresses telecommunication providers rather than
telecommunications users.

**Program Act\
**The *Program Act* (*Programmawet / Loi-programme*) of 30 December
2001, [Belgisch Staatsblad / Moniteur
Belge](http://212.190.77.115/mopdf/2001/12/31_1.pdf#Page34) 2001 of 31
December 2001, inserts a provision, art. 109terE, para. 6,  in the *Law
on the reform of certain economic state companies* (*Wet betreffende de
hervorming van sommige economische overheidsbedrijven*) of 21 March
1991, which may become a prohibition to use cryptography in
telecommunications. The provision reads: \'The king determines (\...)
the technical and administrative measures applicable to (\...)
telecommunication-service subscribers and users, (\...) in order to
prohibit the provision of telecommunications services that prevent or
hamper the measures of the \[wiretap\] Act of 10 June 1998 (\...).\" The
provision will enter into force when the applicable Royal Decree
appears.

Compare also art. 111 of the Act: \"No-one is allowed to establish or
try to establish communications via the telecommunications
infrastructure in the Kingdom that harm the respect for the laws, the
state security, the public order or the good morals or that constitute
an insult to a foreign State.\" Violation of this article is punishable
with imprisonment of one to four years (art. 114 para. 8 Reform Law). 

However, the potential prohibition of article 109terE, para. 6, has to
be read in conjunction with another article in the same Law, art.
109terF. This was inserted on 19 December 1997 (see the [Belgisch
Staatsblad/ Moniteur Belge](http://www.just.fgov.be/) of 30 December
1997) to clear the confusion that an earlier law had caused (see below)
. This article states explicitly that the use of encryption is free. The
provision of indicated encryption services to the public is subject to
prior notification (four weeks in advance) to the Belgian Institute of
Post and Telecommunications. The explanatory note states that the
explicit mention that crypto use is free was needed to indicate the
difference with the former law which wanted to subject encryption to
procedures relating to key deposits. In the 1997 law, the government
kept open the possibility of future action to gain access to coded
messages; \"this problem will be reviewed later, having regard to the
development of the technology or of potential abuse of encryption by
mafia organizations or terrorists\".

**History\
**In January 1996, Belgium found itself having a law which might
prohibit the use of unescrowed encryption. The law was passed in
December 1994 as part of a larger law and went unnoticed at the time.
The law adds a condition under which telecoms equipment may be seized,
namely in case of end equipment which renders tapping ineffective.

According to this law, crypto systems had to be agreed by the Belgian
Institute for Posts and Telecommunications (BIPT), which some
interpreted as an obligation to deposit keys there. However, a BIPT
spokesman said that \"government does not know the consequences of the
law\". The law was not enforced, but Belinfosec (Belgium Information &
Security) had apparently prepared a report proposing further
specifications and enacting clauses. The regulation had to be further
implemented by Royal Decrees. The Ministry of Justice stated they did
not intend to prohibit encryption as a rule. The law was interpreted by
some as allowing a phone to be disconnected when it uses (hardware)
cryptography end equipment.

Two legislation proposals, by Hatry (in
[French](http://www.senate.be/docs/lex/1/1-343/1-343-1_fr.html) or
[Dutch](http://www.senate.be/docs/lex/1/1-343/1-343-1_nl.html)) and
Bribosia/Maximus (in
[French](http://www.senate.be/docs/lex/1/1-352/1-352-1_fr.html) or
[Dutch](http://www.senate.be/docs/lex/1/1-352/1-352-1_nl.html)) were
submitted to drop the debated provisions of the 1994 law. The proposed
law of Mmes. Bribosia and Maximus additionally tried to solve the law
enforcement problem by requiring everyone who would be able to help in
decrypting to do this, provided the help is necessary for the
investigation.

**3. Developments to regulate cryptography\
**None.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Brazil]{#br} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 3, 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
There are no export or import controls, but the government is working on
a regulation.

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
There are no controls on crypto use.

**3. Developments in cryptography regulation**\
The government is working on a crypto law, but does not intend to
restrict cryptography use.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Bulgaria]{#bu} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
Bulgaria has signed the [Wassenaar](#Wassenaar) Arrangement.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Burma (Myanmar)]{#bi} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
Export and import of cryptography may be restricted on the basis of the
Computer Science Development Law (SLORC Law No. 10/96) of 20 September
1996, as amended by Law No. 3/98 of 23 February 1998. This law allows
the Myanmar Computer Science Development Council to prescribe types of
computer software and information that are not permitted to be imported
or exported; violation of this prohibition carries a sentence of 5 to 10
years\' imprisonment. According to an article by James Finch and
Gladstone on the law (CTLR 2000: 67-70), as of March 2000, the Council
had not promulgated any such permission or prohibition, implying that
crypto import and export may be unrestricted.

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
Cryptography is said to be restricted through a licensing regime.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Cambodia]{#cam} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
There are no import or export controls for cryptography. However, it is
general practice to require licenses from the Ministry of Posts and
Telecommunications of Cambodia for exporting crypto hardware, and
permission may also be required to import crypto hardware. (See
[here](http://www.steptoe.com/assets/attachments/Encryption_Countryguide.pdf)
for more details.)

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
There is no regulation restricting use of cryptography. (See
[here](http://www.steptoe.com/assets/attachments/Encryption_Countryguide.pdf)
for more details.)

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Canada]{#ca} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 1, 3, 4, 5, 8\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
Canada follows (pre-December 1998) [Wassenaar](#co) regulations. The
export of items from Canada may be subject to restriction if they are
included on the Export Control List. In December 1996, Canada granted
export of 56-bit cryptography to most countries for a twelve-month trial
period; this has been extended until 30 June 1998. Mass-marker and
public-domain software is excluded from the controls.

All types of cryptography can be transported between Canada and the
United States, but cryptography imported from the US which is not
otherwise included in the Export Control List remains under US
[export](#ear) rules and cannot be exported from Canada if the US does
not allow export. Public domain and mass-market software can be freely
exported, but if it contains US-origin goods, paperwork must be filled
out.

A discussion paper by the Task Force on Electronic Commerce, from
February 1998, [A Cryptography Policy Framework for Electronic
Commerce](http://strategis.ic.gc.ca/SSG/cy00005e.html), invited
discussion over a review of Canada\'s crypto policy, including export
controls. It presented three policy options:

-   relax controls either by matching the most liberal export policies
    of other countries, or through recognition of the availability of
    similar-strength crypto products in foreign markets;
-   maintain the existing policy;
-   extend the export controls by adding mass-market and public-domain
    software, possibly with a relaxation for key recovery products.

An [analysis](http://e-com.ic.gc.ca/english/crypto/631d3.html) of the
189 responses to the discussion paper was published on 28 September
1998. Most respondents favored relaxing controls on the export of
cryptography.

Immediately following this publication, the government announced a new
cryptography policy on 1 October 1998 (available at [Industry
Canada](http://strategis.ic.gc.ca/SSG/cy00001e.html)). Industry Minister
[John Manley affirmed](http://jya.com/ca-crypto.htm) the government\'s
commitment to the Wassenaar Arrangement. However, the export controls
would take into account the practices of other countries, so that they
are not more restrictive than those of, in particular, the US, which had
relaxed exports for certain sectors in September 1998. Furthermore, the
export-permit process would be streamlined. For many products, users, or
destinations, after a one-time review, general or multi-destination,
multi-user permits would be issued.

See the relevant [sections of the Export Control
List](http://axion.physics.ubc.ca/ECL.html) and [a summary of Canada\'s
export controls on cryptographic
software](http://insight.mcmaster.ca/org/efc/pages/doc/crypto-export.html).
Cf. also Baker and Hintze\'s [comparison of US and Canada export
controls](http://www.steptoe.com/encryp.htm).

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
There are no domestic regulations on cryptography.

**Case-law**\
In R. v. Meron, \[2004\] P.E.I.J. No. 95, the accused was asked to
provide passwords for encrypted hard drives, but he refused to
cooperate. The case gives no further details about the context or
consequences.

In [R. v.
Beauchamp](http://www.canlii.org/en/on/onsc/doc/2008/2008canlii27481/2008canlii27481.html),
2008 CanLII 27481 (ON SC), the defence requested disclosure of hard
drives that had been seized by the police. Part of these were encrypted.
The court held that the integrity of the administration of justice
cannot be maintained by providing a copy to the defence of encrypted
files, *inter alia* because the Crown cannot exercise its discretion to
protect individuals\' privacy interest or to prevent further criminal
acts from being committed or facilitated when handing over the data.
Hence, the application for disclosure of a copy of the encrypted files
in the seized hard drives was refused.

**3. Developments in cryptography regulation**\
A discussion paper by the Task Force on Electronic Commerce, from
February 1998, [A Cryptography Policy Framework for Electronic
Commerce](http://e-com.ic.gc.ca/english/crypto/631d11.html), invited
discussion over a review of Canada\'s crypto policy. It presented
options for reviewing the domestic policy on encryption of stored data
and on encryption of real-time communications.

For domestic encryption of *stored data*, the paper suggested the
following options:

-   a laissez-faire model: continue with current policies and leave
    everything to the market;
-   a minimum standards approach: encourage crypto users to store
    back-up crypto keys or to provide business data recovery; this would
    be done by stimulating industry self-regulation, and possibly
    through using the government\'s PKI (see below) to only
    cross-certify private crypto service providers that comply with the
    minimum standards;
-   mandatory access legislation through prohibiting non-key recovery
    cryptography.

For domestic encryption of *real-time communications*, the paper
suggested the following options:

-   maintain the status quo, that is, telecom carriers are required to
    decrypt to the extent they are able to, and the only telecom
    carriers required for law enforcement and national security reasons
    to undo encryption they themselves employ are the new wireless
    providers of personal communications services and local multipoint
    communications services (the other carriers are currently not
    required to keep back-up copies of session keys);
-   obligations on all carriers: require that all federally regulated
    telecommunications carriers providing encryption services retain the
    ability to decrypt for law enforcement and national securities
    agencies on receipt of a court order; this would be extended to
    provincially regulated service providers, but would not affect
    Internet service providers;
-   mandatory controls: in addition to the second option, crypto service
    providers would be obliged to provide mandatory assistance for
    decryption, and users would be prohibited from using non-key
    recovery crypto.

An [analysis](http://e-com.ic.gc.ca/english/crypto/631d3.html) of the
189 responses to the discussion paper was published on 28 September
1998. Most respondents favored relaxing controls on the use of
cryptography.

Immediately following this publication, the government announced a new
cryptography policy on 1 October 1998 (available at [Industry
Canada](http://e-com.ic.gc.ca/english/crypto/631d1.html)). Industry
Minister [John Manley
affirmed](http://e-com.ic.gc.ca/english/releases/41d6.html) the freedom
to develop and use cryptography products. The government will not
implement mandatory key recovery or a mandatory licensing regime for
TTPs. The government does, however, encourage industry to use
key-recovery techniques for stored data, and it will use government
procurement to encourage commercial key escrow by acting \"as a model
user of cryptography\". Finally, the government proposes to make it an
offense to \"wrongfully disclose private encryption key information and
to use cryptography to commit or hide evidence of a crime.\" Moreover,
\"warrants and assistance orders also apply to situations where
encryption is encountered - to obtain the decrypted material or
decryption keys.\"

See the [summary](http://e-com.ic.gc.ca/english/fastfacts/43d7.html) of
Canada\'s crypto policy.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Chile]{#chl} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
There are no import controls.

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
There is no law regulating encryption use.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [People\'s Republic of China]{#prc} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 3, 5\]

See also [Hong Kong Special Administrative Region](#hk).

**1. Export/ import controls**\
By State Council Order No. 273, \"Commercial Use Password Management
Regulations\" ([text in
Chinese](http://www.oscca.gov.cn/News/200512/News_1053.htm); inofficial
translation [here](ChinaSEMC1999.pdf)), published on 15 October 1999 and
in effect since 7 October 1999, import and export of encryption products
requires a license by the State Encryption Management Commission. The
SEMC was later renamed the State Cryptography Administration, which
manages the Office of State Commercial Cryptography Administration
(OSCCA). According to a \"clarification letter\" sent to US businesses
in China in early March 2000, this involves only hardware and software
for which encryption and decoding operations are core functions. As a
result, products in which cryptography is only built-in (such as mobile
phones and browser software) are exempted. Moreover, the letter
clarified that the regulations do not entail key escrow.\
However, the clarification letter only seems to apply to pre-2000
products. All products since 2000 seem to require a license.

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
By State Council Order No. 273, \"Commercial Use Password Management
Regulations\" ([text in
Chinese](http://www.oscca.gov.cn/News/200512/News_1053.htm)), published
on 15 October 1999 and in effect since 7 October 1999, domestic crypto
manufacture and use is severely restricted. Officially designated
manufacturers must obtain aproval from the State Encryption Management
Commission / State Cryptography Administration (OSCCA) for the type and
model (including key length) of their crypto products. Organisations and
individuals may not distribute encryption products produced abroad.
People may only use encryption products approved by the Commission, and
they may not use commercial encryption products developed by themselves
or produced abroad. For this use, they must have approval by the
Commission. Only foreign diplomatic missions and consulates are exempted
from this approval. The deadline for registration of crypto users was 31
January 2000.

According to a \"clarification letter\" sent to US businesses in China
in early March 2000, this involves, however, only specialized hardware
and software for which encryption and decoding operations are core
functions. As a result, products in which cryptography is only built-in
are exempted. Moreover, the letter clarified that the regulations do not
entail key escrow.\
However, the clarification letter only seems to apply to pre-2000
products. All products since 2000 seem to require a license.

For wireless crypto products, China seems to require use of a Chinese
proprietary algorithm (WAPI), and AES and WEP must be disabled.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Colombia]{#col} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
There are no import restrictions.

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
Use of encryption is not restricted.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Costa Rica]{#cori} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
Use of encryption is apparently not regulated.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Czech republic]{#cr} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
Import is allowed \"if it is declared by the importer not to be used for
production, development, collection or use of nuclear, chemical or
biological weapons.\"

Export is regulated according to the (pre-December 1998)
[Wassenaar](#Wassenaar) Arrangement, implemented in the *Law on the
control of export and import of goods and technologies subject to
international controls* and further regulations on licensing export and
import (regulations 43/1997 and 44/1997). However, the controls do not
seem to be enforced, and the official government document *Information
Policy of the Czech Republic - Strategy Basics* states: \"The state
shall not restrict import or export of cryptographic technologies.\"

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
None.

**3. Developments in cryptography regulation**\
No crypto regulation is expected.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Denmark]{#de} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 1, 4, 5, 9\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
There are export controls according to the (pre-December 1998)
[Wassenaar Arrangement](#Wassenaar), including the General Software
Note. The Danish representative agreed to the December 1998 Wassenaar
changes, but this has met with serious resistance in the Danish
parliament and the government\'s IT Security Council (see an
[article](http://cph.ing.dk/konf/root/netnyt/html/0084.html) in
Danish).\
The [Danish Encryption Policy](http://www.fsk.dk) (click on Emneord,
Kryptering), published by the four responsible ministers on 7 April
2000, is based on the principle that \"Efforts should be made to ensure
the greatest possible liberalization of export control for dual-use
goods and technologies, within the EU and Wassenaar, but with due
consideration for the need to remain in control of the spreading of very
sensitive products to sensitive end-users.\"\
Import is not controlled, and this policy will be maintained, as
confirmed the first principle of the Danish Encryption Policy.

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
None.

**3. Developments in cryptography regulation**\
The Danish Technology Council, in an October 1995 report, discussed
several options for cryptography policy, varying from doing nothing to
prohibiting cryptography, without really taking a stand itself.
According to the report, the issue is a Gordian knot, which should be
cut soon by the Danish government.

The Danish IT Security Council adopted a policy on encryption in June
1996. The Council recommended that no limitations on encryption use
should be introduced. Only in the case of telecommunications companies
providing encryption as an integral part of their services, the
companies should be able to decrypt a communication through a court
order. The Council was of the opinion that secure and inviolable
communication should be promoted and that any encryption prohibition at
present is an illusion in reality, given the spread of efficient
cryptography through the Internet.

A departmental Expert Committee, appointed in the summer of 1996 in
preparation for a final decision on the crypto issue by the government,
released its [Report by the Expert Committee on
Cryptography](http://www.fsk.dk/fsk/publ/1997/crypt/crypt.html) in April
1997. The Committee, under pressure of time, restricted its study to a
regulation of the *sale* of cryptography (not its manufacture, use or
import). The Committee recommended that no regulation of cryptography
should be introduced presently. It further recommended that the Expert
Committee should continue to follow international developments, and
carry out an analysis to assess the possibilities and consequences of
introducing incentive schemes to induce people to use key-recovery
crypto.

The Expert Committee was allowed to continue its work, and in May 1998,
it presented its final conclusions ([press
release](http://www.fsk.dk/fsk/presse/260698.html) in Danish) in a
\"Report on incentive solutions\" (updated version available in
[Danish](http://www.fsk.dk/fsk/publ/1998/krypt/) and partly in
[English](http://www.fsk.dk/fsk/publ/1998/krypt/eng/clean.htm)). The
report recommended that no restrictions should be established on
citizens\' and companies\' encryption capabilities. No initiative should
be made to incite people to use key-recovery cryptography. Still, the
Danish government should not reject the possibility of a future crypto
regulation. The international development should be monitored, and the
crypto question should be answered anew if an international direction of
crypto policies should emerge.

The government was to take a final position on the crypto question in
1998, but it was only on 7 April 2000 that four ministers published a
letter to the IT-security Council with the [Danish Encryption
Policy](http://www.fsk.dk) (click on Emneord, Kryptering). The four
principles stress that the current policy of free use of encryption will
be maintained. Moreover, the Danish government will actively promote the
dissemination and use of strong encryption in Denmark. Denmark will not
implement key recovery regulations, but the government should \"also be
mindful of the continued need of the police, in accordance with the
legal protection guarantees afforded by the Administration of Justice
Act, to make use of existing means of investigation to prevent and clear
up crime.\"

The Danish Teletrust Group has set up an Encryption Group to work on the
technical and legal concept of public-key certifying authorities. A
Centre Certifying Authority (CCA) would coordinate control and
certification of key centres to provide secure keys within
telecommunications. It would be necessary for such a CCA to have a legal
basis. The Danish government has not (yet) implemented the initiative
into law.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Egypt]{#eg} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
The import of tangible cryptography should take place through an
importer who is registered on the Importers Register prepared by the
Ministry of Economy and International Trade.

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
According to the 2005 HRW report [False
Freedom](http://hrw.org/reports/2005/mena1105/), communications service
operators and providers require permission for using encryption.
Permission has to be given by the state communications agencies,
national-security services and armed forces. Permission is granted only
for \'satisfactory\' reasons, which in practice has happened \'on
numerous occasions\'. 

**3. Developments in cryptography regulation\
**According to a [2002
document](http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/e-strategy/Seminars/CapeVerde/AfricaLegalFramework1.pdf)
by the ITU on the legal framework for e-commerce in Africa, an
\'encryption office shall be established for depositing the encryption
keys, safeguarding the encrypted data, which cannot be decoded unless
according to a court decision\', suggesting an intention to mandate key
escrow.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Estonia]{#es} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
There are no import controls, but export is controlled along the
[Wassenaar](#Wassenaar) model. Licenses for export can be obtained from
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Finland]{#fi} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 4, 5, 8\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
Import of cryptography is not regulated.

For export, a license is required through the *Export Control of
Dual-Use Goods Act* (562/96), which implements the [EU
recommendation](#eu_exp) on export of dual-use goods and the
[Wassenaar](#Wassenaar)Arrangement. A license is not needed if the
crypto product is sold freely in retail and does not require extensive
vendor support.\
The Ministry of Trade and Industry
[announced](http://ktm.elinar.fi/ktm/fin/ktmtiedo.nsf/b6638ff99f5f2761c22565af004ad877/63e4491893d2682ec22569ab0033a535?OpenDocument)
(in Finnish) on 4 December 2000 that as of Spring 2001, mass-market
cryptographic software of unlimited key length can be freely exported to
all countries, in line with the Wassenaar Arrangement decision of 1
December 2000.

The government agreed upon a crypto policy on 7 October 1998. The
*National Cryptography Policy guidelines* of 12 October 1998 (copy
available in
[Finnish](http://www.cis.hut.fi/kaip/wassenaar/salauspolitiikkamuistio.html%22%22){???=""})
affirm the commitment to the Wassenaar Arrangement and EU
recommendation. However, Finland aims to influence the reform of the
international export regulations so that control lists correspond to
technical development, and to ensure that the necessary restrictions
will not unreasonably impede normal foreign trade.

See also section 5.1 of Simo-Pekka Parviainen\'s
[thesis](http://ethesis.helsinki.fi/julkaisut/oik/julki/pg/parviainen/).

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
The Privacy and Data Security in Telecommunications Act of June 1999
(no. 565-1999) allow telecoms users and subscribers \"right to code
their telecommunications message in the way they wish utilising the
technical possibilities available thereto\". Telecom operators have to
inform users about the possibilities to protect communications. See
sections 5 and 6 of the
[Act](http://lm-gateway.terranova.fi/www/sivut/english/tele/statutes/1999_565.htm)
(also available in
[Finnish](http://finlex.edita.fi/cgi-bin/kortti/19990565000+Hakulause=19990565000%22){??=""}).

**3. Developments in cryptography regulation**\
At the [OECD meeting](#oecd) of December 1995, Finland did not approve
key escrow proposals. The chairman of the Finnish public
administration\'s group for data security affirmed that Finland will not
require key escrow.

The government crypto policy guidelines (in
[Finnish](http://www.cis.hut.fi/kaip/wassenaar/salauspolitiikkamuistio.html%22%22){???=""})
of 12 October 1998 affirm the support of free trade and use of
cryptography. The provision of crypto services will be subject to a
licensing and other authorization systems, based on voluntary action.
Key escrow will not be mandatory. In criminal investigation, suspects do
not have to assist in decryption of encrypted stored or transported
data, but the authorities \"may demand the provider of certification
services or the maintainer of the encryption system to hand over a
secret key in their possession or to otherwise contribute to the
investigation of individual encrypted data\". By 31 December 1998, the
Ministries of Justice and the Interior will clarify the need to reform
the Coercive Criminal Investigation Means Act.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [France]{#fr} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
France has signed the [Wassenaar](#Wassenaar) Arrangement for **export**
controls, with the exception of the (pre-December 1998) General Software
Note. See the government\'s [SSI site](http://www.ssi.gouv.fr) (under
\'Regulation\' \> \'Cryptology\') for a list of applicable laws and
decrees.

The **import** from countries outside the EU and the EEA (European
Economic Area) and **export** of cryptography is regulated by the [Law
No.
2004-575](http://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/WAspad/UnTexteDeJorf?numjo=ECOX0200175L){target="_blank"}
of 21 June 2004 for the trust in the digital economy (*Loi pour la
confiance dans l\'économie numérique*) and [Decree No.
2007-663](http://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/affichTexte.do?cidTexte=JORFTEXT000000646995&categorieLien=cid){target="_blank"}
of 2 May 2007 (*\... relatif aux moyens et aux prestations de
cryptologie*). Articles 29, 30, 31, 34, 35, 36 and 40 of the Law, and
further specified by the Decree, restrict import and export of
cryptography products and services. Cryptography that can only be used
for authentication is free of restrictions (art. 30(II)); the same holds
for various specific types of cryptography mentioned in Annex 1 of
Decree 2007-663. The procedure and forms for declaration and
authorisation are specified in an
[Order](http://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/affichTexte.do?cidTexte=JORFTEXT000000465715&categorieLien=cid){target="_blank"}
of 25 May 2007 (définissant la forme et le contenu des dossiers de
déclaration et de demande d\'autorisation d\'opérations relatives aux
moyens et aux prestations de cryptologie).\
**Import** from within the EU/EEA is free; import from other countries
is subject to declaration, except for categories designated by decree
(art. 30(III)). **Export** is subject to authorisation, except for
categories designated by decree (art. 30(IV)). Authorisations and
declarations executed prior to this law remain valid until their expiry
date (art. 40). Failure to comply with these requirements is punishable
with up to one (declaration) or two (authorisation) years\' imprisonment
and a fine of maximum 15,000 or 30,000 euro, respectively (art. 35).  

**History**\
Formerly, the regulation was the law of 26 July 1996 (see [article
28](http://www.ssi.gouv.fr/fr/reglementation/lois/lois_fr4.html) (in
French)) and the decrees implementing it of 24 February 1998, [no.
98-101](http://www.ssi.gouv.fr/fr/reglementation/lois/lois_fr5.html) (in
French), as changed by decree
[2002-688](http://www.ssi.gouv.fr/fr/reglementation/lois/decret2002-688.html)
(in French), and of 17 March 1999. \
Decree 99-200 of 17 March 1999 ([text in
French](http://www.internet.gouv.fr/francais/textesref/cryptodecret99200.htm),
and
[again](http://www.ssi.gouv.fr/fr/reglementation/lois/lois_fr2.html))
specified categories of cryptography which do not require any prior
formality. Decree 99-199 of 17 March 1999 ([text in
French](http://www.internet.gouv.fr/francais/textesref/cryptodecret99199.htm)
and
[again](http://www.ssi.gouv.fr/fr/reglementation/lois/lois_fr1.html))
specified categories of cryptography for which prior declaration is
required (and no longer prior authorization). These decrees replaced the
decrees 98-206 and 98-207 of 23 March 1998 ([text in
French](http://www.in2p3.fr/secur/legal/decret98-206-tab.html)).

In accordance with Jospin\'s January 1999
[speech](http://www.premier-ministre.gouv.fr/PM/D190199.HTM) (text in
French), a law was proposed for full liberalization of crypto import. A
[Bill on the Information
Society](http://www.assemblee-nationale.fr/projets/pl3143.asp) (No.
3143, text in French) was approved by the Council of Ministers on 13
June 2001, but stranded in parliament. Chapter II of the Bill contained
an extensive revision of the crypto regulations. The import and export
rules were proposed as follows.

-   authentication-only crypto is entirely free (art. 37-II);
-   transfer from an EU member and import of crypto that can be used for
    confidentiality must be declared (decrees may specify crypto exempt
    from this requirement) (art. 37-III);
-   transfer to an EU member and export of crypto that can be used for
    confidentiality requires authorization (decrees may specify crypto
    exempt from this requirement) (art. 37-IV);
-   failure to declare is punishable with up to one year imprisonment,
    failure to comply with authorization with up to two years\' (art.
    43);
-   declarations and authorizations executed prior to this law remain
    valid until their expiry date (art. 49).

Similar provisions have now been enacted through the law on trust in the
digital economy (see above). 

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
France used to restrict the domestic use and supply of cryptography for
a long time (see below under History). This restrictive legislation
(authorization and declaration were required for almost all
cryptography) was slightly liberalized in 1996, when a law was passed
mandating key deposits with Trusted Third Parties (TTPs). However, the
domestic use of cryptography was liberalized in January 1999.
Subsequently, other kinds of regulation (decrytion order, raising
punishment) have followed.

**Current state of the law**\
The **use** of cryptography is free, according to article 30(I) of the
[law No.
2004-575](http://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/WAspad/UnTexteDeJorf?numjo=ECOX0200175L)
of 21 June 2004 for the trust in the digital economy (*Loi pour la
confiance dans l\'économie numérique*). \
The **provision of crypto services** is subject to regulation: service
provision must be declared, except for services designated by decree
that do not harm security or defense interests. Service providers are
subject to professional secrecy (art. 31 of the digital-economy act).
Failure to declare is punishable with up to two years\' imprisonment and
a fine of up to 30,000 euro (art. 35(III)). The law also creates
liability for service providers that store private keys (art. 32).
Moreover, the Prime Minister can prohibit circulation of cryptography
if its supplier does not comply with the regulations, even of the supply
is free of charge (art. 34, sanctioned with up to two years\'
imprisonment (art. 35(II)). 

The *[Law
2001-1062](http://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/citoyen/jorf_nor.ow?numjo=INTX0100032L)
of 15 November 2001 on daily security* (*JO* 16 November 2001, p. 18215)
introduced provisions on decryption assistance and a decryption order. \
For **decryption assistance**, article 30 inserts a Title IV in the
*Code of Criminal Procedure* that entails a power to require all
qualified persons to decrypt or to hand over decryption keys if
encrypted data are encountered during an investigation (art. 230-1 para.
1 FCCP). \'Qualified persons\' is a term used in the Code for experts
who are qualified, for instance by being officially registered, to
perform scientific or technical investigations. The provision can
therefore be invoked to require assistance, for example, of
cryptanalytic experts, or of encryption providers who (depending on the
architecture of their service) might assist in decrypting data from
their customers.\
If it is necessary for the investigation of a crime with a maximum
penalty of at least two years\' imprisonment, the police can ask the
national-security services to crack encrypted data (art. 230-1 para. 2
through 230-5 FCCP). To this end, a Technical Assistance Center (Centre
technique d\'assistance) has been created within the Ministry of the
Interior by [Decree
2002-1073](http://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/WAspad/UnTexteDeJorf?numjo=INTC0200141D)
of 7 August 2002 (*JO* 10 August 2002, p. 13713), the activities of
which are secret.  \
A **decryption order** was introduced by Article 31(II), in the form of
a penalization in the *Criminal Code*: someone who fails to comply with
a decryption order is punishable with a maximum of three years\'
imprisonment and 45,000 euro, or with five years\' and 75,000 euro if
decryption could have prevented or mitigated the effects of a crime
(art. 434-15-2 FCC). There is no explicit mirroring provision in the
Code of Criminal Procedure regulating the conditions for the police to
give a decryption order; apparently, titles II and III of book 1 of the
French Code of Criminal Procedure contain an implicit power to order
someone to hand over a decryption key or password or to decrypt herself.
In the parliamentary proceedings, there has been no discussion whether
the provision is compatible with the privilege against
self-incrimination; in light of the traditional inquisitorial character
of French criminal procedure, it should be assumed that suspects can be
ordered to hand over keys or to decrypt.\
According to article 31(I), TTPs offering confidentiality services are
required to hand over the decryption keys of their customers or to
decrypt themselves, under threat of two years\' imprisonment and a fine
of 45,000 euro (art. 11-1 of the *Law of 10 July 1991 on the secrecy of
correspondence by telecommunications*). 

**Maximum penalties** for crimes are **raised** if cryptography was used
to prepare or commit a crime or to facilitate the preparation or
commission of a crime, according to article 37 of the [law No.
2004-575](http://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/WAspad/UnTexteDeJorf?numjo=ECOX0200175L)
of 21 June 2004 for the trust in the digital economy (*Loi pour la
confiance dans l\'économie numérique*). The maximum punishments of
crimes punishable with up to three years\' imprisonment are doubled, and
higher maximum punishments are raised one category (with categories of
5, 7, 10, 15, 20, 30 years and life imprisonment). The punishment does
not apply, however, if the perpetrator, upon request, submits the
plaintext and private key of encrypted messages; therefore, this
provision also functions as an indirect form of a **decryption order**.

**Investigation powers** are attributed to competent officials to
investigate crimes related to the crypto regulations, including search
and seizure of cryptography. Failure to comply with a request for
information or documents or blocking the investigation is punishable
with up to six months\' imprisonment and a fine of 7,500 euro (art. 36).

**History of French domestic crypto laws**\
Before 1996, delivery, importation, exportation, and use of cryptography
were subjected to: a) prior declaration if the cryptography can have no
other object than authenticating communications or assuring the
integrity of transmitted messages; b) prior authorisation by the Prime
Minister in all other cases.

Simplified procedures existed for certain cryptography products or
services or certain user categories. For authorisation, a dossier
containing technical details and administrative data had to be
submitted. Authorisation could be subjected to certain conditions in
order to reserve the use of certain types of cryptography to defined
user or application categories.

A press release of 16 October 1995 specified that use of cryptography
for protecting passwords, access codes, subscriber numbers or bank card
numbers for authentication purposes only necessitated a declaration by
the provider when installing the service.

On 18 June 1996, France passed a law adapting its restrictions on
cryptography (text in
[English](http://www.telecom.gouv.fr/english/activ/telecom/nloi17.htm)
or
[French](http://www.telecom.gouv.fr/francais/activ/telecom/nloi17.htm)).
The law was published in the *Journal Officiel* on 27 July 1996 and is
referred to as the 26th July law. Decrees on the application of the law
(which have to be promulgated before the law is applicable) were
published on 25 February 1998 (see the [Journal
Officiel](http://www.legifrance.gouv.fr) of that date) (decree 98-101 of
24 February 1998 on the conditions of declarations and authorizations,
and decree 98-102 of 24 February 1998 on the conditions for key escrow
agencies), and several more decrees were published on 13 and 23 March
1998.

Cryptography that does not provide confidentiality could be used without
restriction (so the prior requirement of declaration is cancelled);
supply of authentication-only cryptography still had to be declared. Use
and supply of confidentiality cryptography required authorization.
Decree 98-206 of 23 March 1998 ([text in
French](http://www.in2p3.fr/secur/legal/decret98-206-tab.html))
specified categories of cryptography which did not require declaration
or authorization (such as video-scramblers and ATMs). A supplier was
exempted from the formalities for use exclusively for developing,
validating, or demonstrating cryptography, if he informed SCSSI at least
two weeks in advance. No authorization was given for cryptography for
use by radio amateurs. A supply authorization for collective use
exempted users from acquiring a use authorization. The use of
cryptography with key lengths limited to 40 bits was exempted from
declaration or authorization if ciphertexts can be cracked in maximum of
2^40^ trials, according to decree 98-207 of 23 March 1998 ([text in
French](http://www.in2p3.fr/secur/legal/decret98-207-tab.html)) (this
requirement was interpreted by [Yves le
Roux](http://www.opengroup.org/security/meetings/apr98/french-regulation.pdf)
as a requirement to incorporate in every ciphertext a known plaintext
(that is given to the authorities) to enable a known-plaintext attack);
the supply of such cryptography was subject to declaration.

The law furthermore introduced Trusted Third Parties (TTPs), or rather,
Key Escrow Agencies (KEA). If a KEA and its key-escrow scheme had been
approved, users who escrowed their keys with the KEA would be able to
freely use the cryptography scheme with these keys. The KEAs would be
required to hand over keys to law enforcement under certain conditions.
The only authorized Key Escrow Agency was SCSSI, according to a decree
of 13 March 1998.

Decree 98-102 ([text in
French](http://www.telecom.gouv.fr/francais/activ/telecom/deccrypto2.htm))
specified the conditions for KEAs. It addressed, among others, the
duration of a license to operate, the information the KEA had to provide
to SCSSI, the information to register, user contract terms, a register
of key requests by law enforcement and a separate (classified) one for
key requests by security agencies, security measures, and how to handle
when ceasing the activity. KEA employees were required to have a French
security clearance.

In a 16 January 1998 [press
release](http://www.telecom.gouv.fr/francais/comdis/cp160198.htm), State
Secretary of Industry Pierret welcomed the statement by Jospin that
56-bit cryptography should be liberalized as soon as possible to a
simple regime of authorization.

The action plan on \"Electronic Commerce\" [(see part III, \"Creating
Confidence\", in particular part
III.3)](http://www.finances.gouv.fr/commerce_electronique/lorentz/confiance.htm),
published 7 January 1998 by a task force led by Francis Lorentz, stated
that the government was \"resolutely oriented towards a liberal reading
of the law\". It urged a rapid implementation of the new law. It
proposed further:

-   a strong communication policy to promote the decrees;
-   to promote with its (especially European) partners the principles
    underlying the policy;
-   to bring about an agreement with France\'s most important trading
    partners on the principles and establishment of TTPs/ key deposits;
-   to regularly review the regulatory framework (in particular, the
    40-bit limit should be reviewed rapidly), conducting a broad
    consultation on this before the end of 1998;
-   a government TTP/deposit service to be established as a role model,
    while stressing the importance of developing private operators for
    this function as well;
-   that the decrees should not impose technical architectures for TTPs,
    but should limit themselves to functional demands.

It was unclear to what extent the restrictive regulation was enforced in
practice; it was rumoured to be widely ignored. It seemed impossible for
individuals or enterprises to obtain authorisation for \"strong\"
cryptography. Even for state-owned industry, cryptography that does not
serve military or high-grade security purposes had to be breakable.
SCSSI, the office dealing with authorisation, rendered decisions without
motivation. []{#fr_Summary}

For the state of the law **before 1999** (NOTE: this is outdated now),
see also the [summary of the French encryption
regulation](http://www.opengroup.org/security/meetings/apr98/french-regulation.pdf)
(in pdf) by Yves le Roux, including a list of the then applicable laws
and decrees. The French **pre-1999 regulation (now outdated)** could be
summed up in the following table (reprinted with the kind permission of
[Yves le
Roux](http://www.opengroup.org/security/meetings/apr98/french-regulation.pdf)):

  ----------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------- -------------------------------- ---------------------------- ---------------
  **functionality**                               **supply**                          **import from outside EU/EEA**   **use**                      **export**
  authentication-only                             declaration                         declaration                      free                         declaration
  confidentiality with key length under 40 bits   authorization or declaration (\*)   authorization or free (\*)       authorization or free (\*)   authorization
  confidentiality using Key Escrow Agency         authorization                       authorization                    free                         authorization
  other confidentiality                           authorization                       authorization                    authorization                authorization
  ----------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------- -------------------------------- ---------------------------- ---------------

(\*) The dispensation was given for crypto which is sure to be cracked
in maximum 2^40^ rounds.

At a [press
conference](http://www.premier-ministre.gouv.fr/PM/D190199.HTM) (text in
French) on 19 January 1999, Prime Minister Jospin announced the
liberalization of the domestic crypto legislation. Use of cryptography
of up to 128 bits is allowed as per direct (this was raised from 40
bits), while a law is being prepared for the complete liberalization of
crypto use (see below). The mandatory nature of key deposits with TTPs
is abolished.\
These changes were implemented in decrees 99-200 of 17 March 1999 ([text
in
French](http://www.internet.gouv.fr/francais/textesref/cryptodecret99200.htm))
and decree 99-199 of 17 March 1999 ([text in
French](http://www.internet.gouv.fr/francais/textesref/cryptodecret99199.htm)),
pending the law which is to offer full liberalization of crypto use. See
the summary table above (under 1) for a specification of cryptography of
which the use is free.

Subsequently, a law was proposed to relax the previous restrictive
crypto regulations. As outlined in the October 1999 [*Policy
paper*](http://www.finances.gouv.fr/societe_information/anglais/chapitre3_ang.htm#3.4)
*on the adaptation of the legal framework to the information society,*
the [Bill on the Information
Society](http://www.assemblee-nationale.fr/projets/pl3143.asp) (No.
3143, text in French) was approved by the Council of Ministers on 13
June 2001 (see [general
information](http://www.internet.gouv.fr/francais/textesref/pagsi2/lsi.htm)
in French on this bill). The bill stranded in parliament, however.
Chapter II of the Bill contained an extensive revision of the crypto
regulations. Some of these amendments (below indicated with (#)) were
enacted in the November 2001 *Law on daily security*, others (indicated
with &) in the June 2004 *Law on trust in the digital economy* (see
above). The proposed domestic rules were as follows. 

-   *use and provision*
    -   use of crypto is entirely free (art. 37-I); (&)
    -   authentication-only crypto is entirely free (art. 37-II); (&)
    -   provision of cryptography that can be used for confidentiality
        must be declared (decrees may specify crypto exempt from this
        requirement) (art. 37-III); failure to declare is punishable
        with up to one year imprisonment (art. 43); declarations
        executed prior to this law remain valid until their expiry date
        (art. 49);  (&)
-   *TTP services*
    -   provision of crypto *services* must be declared (sanctioned with
        up to two years\' imprisonment (art. 43-III)); such TTPs can
        subject themselves to voluntary accreditation (art. 38);
    -   TTPs are held liable under certain conditions, both for
        confidentiality (art. 39) (&) and authentication (art. 40)
        services;
    -   the Prime Minister can prohibit circulation of cryptography
        if its supplier does not comply with the regulations (art. 41,
        sanctioned with up to two years\' imprisonment (art. 43-II));
        (&)
    -   Key Escrow Agencies have to decrypt or give decryption keys upon
        order, sanctioned with up to two year\'s imprisonment (art. 42);
        (#)
-   *criminal procedure and decryption order*
    -   competent officials are attributed several powers to investigate
        crimes related to the crypto regulations; failure to comply with
        a request for information or documents or blocking the
        investigation is punishable with up to six months\' imprisonment
        (art. 44); (&)
    -   if cryptography was used to facilitate the preparation or
        commission of a crime, the maximum punishment can be raised by a
        certain amount (but not if the offendant handed over plaintext
        or decryption keys) (art. 45); (&)
    -   failure to comply with a decryption order (see below) is
        punishable with maximum three years\' imprisonment, or with five
        years\' if decryption could have prevented or mitigated the
        effects of a crime (art. 46); (#)
    -   a power is introduced to require all qualified persons to
        decrypt or to hand over decryption keys if encrypted data are
        encountered during an investigation (proposed art. 230-1 para. 1
        FCCP); (#)
    -   if it is necessary for the investigation of a crime with a
        maximum penalty of at least twe years\' imprisonment, the police
        can ask the national-security services to crack encrypted data
        (proposed art. 230-1 para. 2 - 230-5 FCCP). (#)

See the [government SSI](http://www.ssi.gouv.fr) site (under
\'Regulation\' \> \'Cryptology\') on the applicable laws and decrees.
For former regulattions, see the (**now outdated**) [summary of the
pre-1999 French encryption
regulation](http://www.opengroup.org/security/meetings/apr98/french-regulation.pdf)
(in pdf) by Yves le Roux.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Germany]{#ge} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 1, 3, 4, 5, 7\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
Export is regulated according to the [EU regulation](#eu_exp) and the
[Wassenaar Arrangement](#co), in the regulations as amended according to
the *General License Nr. 16* (pdf
[text](http://www.sicherheit-im-internet.de/download/ag_16.pdf) in
German, published in the [Bundesanzeiger](http://www.bundesanzeiger.de)
of 31 August 1999, in force since 1 September 1999 (earlier version in
Bundesanzeiger 32a of 15 February 1997)).

A press release of 27 August 1999 of the Ministry of Economic Affairs
specified the new export controls, which stated that export controls for
mass-market cryptography are limited to the absolute necessary.
Mass-market crypto export within the EU has already been liberalized by
the EU. Except for export to a few countries or for sensitive (military)
applications, companies can now decide themselves whether a product
falls within the category of mass-market crypto for which a general
license suffices. There is no general requirement to declare, but
exporters must be able, when requested, to hand over the specifics of
exports. When in doubt, the Federal Export Agency (BAFA) will help (see
[address](cls-addr.htm) list).

See also section 5.3 of Simo-Pekka Parviainen\'s
[thesis](http://ethesis.helsinki.fi/julkaisut/oik/julki/pg/parviainen/).\
A good article by Stefan Schuppert on Germany\'s export regulations (in
German) appeared in *Computer und Recht* 2001/7, p. 429-434.

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
The Amateur Radio Ordinance ([Verordnung zum Gesetz ueber den
Amateurfunk](http://www.bundesrecht.juris.de/bundesrecht/afuv_2005/gesamt.pdf))
of 15 February 2005, BGBl. 2005, 242, prohibits encryption of amateur
radio traffic \'to mystify its contents\' (zur Verschleierung des
Inhalts) (art. 16(8)). Formerly, the Ordinance required amateur
communications to be in \'plain language\', initially for international
communications (in the 1982 Order for the Radio Service Implementing the
International Teleommunications Treaty) and since 1998 also for domestic
communications. 

**3. Developments in cryptography regulation**\
On 2 June 1999, the German government announced its \"Corner points of
the German crypto policy\" ([Eckpunkte der deutschen
Kryptopolitik](http://www.bmwi.de/presse/1999/0602prm1.html)). There are
five cornerstones.

1.  The government does not intend to restrict the free availability of
    cryptography. It will actively support the spread of secure
    encryption in Germany.
2.  The government will take measures to establish a framework of trust
    for secure encryption.
3.  The government considers indispensable the ability of crypto
    manufacturers to develop secure and powerful crypto products.
4.  The spread of strong cryptography should not erode the government\'s
    interception powers. Developments will therefore be closely
    monitored, and a report will be issued after two years. Besides, the
    government will make an effort to enhance the technical competence
    of law-enforcement and security agencies.
5.  The government greatly values the international cooperation in
    crypto policy. It will advocate market-driven, open standards and
    interoperable systems.

**History of the discussions about crypto regualation**\
Several politicians have expressed a desire to regulate cryptography.
There have been many conflicting rumours on the likelihood of a crypto
regulation. Interior Minister Kanther stated on 22 July 1997 that
presently, there will be no crypto law; first, one should investigate
what is technically feasible and useful. Overall, the government seemed
to lean toward an intention not to regulate cryptography.

Allegedly, the government has been considering three variants of a
crypto regulation:

1.  crypto service providers would have to store escrowed keys and if
    necessary hand these over to law-enforcement
2.  1 + marketing of encryption products would require a license
3.  1 + 2 + prohibition of non-licensed (escrowed) encryption

Federal Interior Minister Kanther stated, in a speech on 28 April 1997,
he wants to control encryption, by allowing only technologies whose
manufacturers agree to provide keys to law enforcement (this seems
option 2 in the above). In June 1997, however, the Interior Ministry
seemed to favor a two-year voluntary key-escrow approach, in which the
government would certify cryptography products which incorporate
key-escrow (which seems option 1 in the above). Use of certified
products would be voluntary. In October 1997, parliamentarian Tauss
revealed that Kanther favours a crypto chip, comparable to the US
Clipper chip, for use by the government, in order to create market
pressure to push others to use the same technology. There is little
support from industry for such an approach. The discussion over this
\"Pluto chip\" was downplayed in early 1998, when producer Siemens and
commissioner BSI (government agency for IT security) stated that the
chip did not contain a backdoor.

The German federal government was, however, itself divided over the
issue. Contrary to Kanther, the Minister of Economic Affairs
[Rexrodt](http://www.bmwi.de/reden/1997/0609rede3.html) opposed any
restriction on crypto use. Likewise, the state Ministers of Economic
Affairs in a March 1997 conference in Eltville spoke out against a ban
on cryptography. Justice Minister Schmidt-Jortzig also opposed a
restrictive crypto regulation. The initiative on Electronic Commerce
(\"[Elektronischer
Geschäftsverkehr](http://www.bmwi.de/infogesellschaft.html)\"), dated 29
October 1997, declares: \"The federal government does currently not
intend to legally regulate the marketing or use of crypto products. In
Germany, therefore, crypto systems can be freely chosen and used.\"
Ulrich Sandl, from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, said at the RSA Data
Security Conference, 13 January 1998, that GAK systems were ruled out
until at least the end of the year; moreover, he implied that use of US
key recovery products may not be in accordance with German privacy law.

In December 1996, a meeting behind closed door was apparently held by
federal and state Secretaries of State, discussing crypto regulation.
The outcome of the meeting seemed to be some proposal to regulate
cryptography: only licensed crypto could be used, and crypto
manufacturers and distributors would be required, in order to have their
products licensed, to ensure deposit of private crypto keys for
law-enforcement and national security access, as well as to deposit the
crypto source code. Distribution and use of non-licensed crypto would be
banned. However, rumours over the status of such a proposal widely
differred: some claimed that the proposal was merely a shot in the blue
to trigger reactions, others claimed it was a (preliminary) draft of a
impending regulation.

The Bavarian Secretary of Internal Affairs demanded a federal law
against conspiratorial encryption technologies in telecommunications.

In the April 1997 parliamentary debate on the Information and
Communication Services Law, the FDP explicitly spoke out against a
crypto regulation. CDU/CSU-MP Marschewski stated that encryption should
forthwith be put under a Europe-wide licensing regime. The political
party Bündnis/ Die Grünen opposes a cryptography prohibition or a
restrictive (e.g., key- escrow) regulation. The German Federal
Parliament, in a [20 June 1996
resolution](http://www.kuner.com/data/crypto/edgov04.htm), found that
effective encryption procedures may be freely chosen by participants
within the scope of the constitutional right to confidential
communication (which may be breached for internal or external security
reasons).

An interministerial Task Force on Crypto Politics was set up in October
1996 to develop concrete suggestions for an overall political strategy
on IT security until the end of 1996. The federal Minister of Economic
Affairs, in announcing the Task Force on 7 October 1996, stated that a
trade-off should be found between the equally important principles of
freely choosing cryptography and preventing criminal crypto abuse.

A Ministry of the Interior official responsible for national security,
in a November 1996 debate, appeared to favour a crypto legislation to
protect law-enforcement and national security. Although he did not think
criminals would use licensed (key-escrow) cryptography, he stated that
use of unlicensed crypto would give rise to criminal suspicion, and
would moreover facilitate traffic analysis to discover criminal
organizations.

The German Council for Research, Technology and Innovation, in a
December 1995 report on the Information Society, recommends that legal
preconditions have to be made for the decryption of documents by state
authorities, that specify the criteria for decryption competence and
unequivocally regulate the seizure of documents. The report states that
in developing and implementing cryptography products it has to be
realized that it must be possible to decrypt single documents in
relation to the execution of criminal procedure law.

A conference of Justice Ministers in December 1995 expressed concern
that law enforcement is not keeping pace with technological
developments. Federal Minister of Justice Schmidt-Jortzig acknowledges
the problem of law enforcement, but doubts that an encryption
prohibition could be enforced. Moreover, a German regulation would be
inadequate to deal with the global matter of cryptography. In March
1997, at a conference of his FDP party, he called demands to ban
cryptography deeply illiberal.

In its policy document [*Info 2000: Deutschlands Weg in die
Informationsgesellschaft*](http://www.kp.dlr.de/BMWi/gip/programme/info2000/),
the German government supported the European Commission\'s [ETS
initiative](#eu). A focal point was promoting encryption to protect
confidential information by network operators. \"In this respect the
legal preconditions for the decryption by state bodies are to be
examined.\" As regards the fight against crime, \"dangerous gaps\" in
law enforcement\'s ability through criminals\' use of encryption should
be stopped as soon as possible. \"Where this should not be possible with
the available methods, new forms also of technical information provision
should be considered, to not let crime get a lead.\" The deployment of
criminal law means should be considered only as an \"ultima ratio\".

The Enquiry Committee \"Future of the media\" of the German Parliament
recommended in 1998 not to restrict cryptography. \"The capabilities of
users to protect themselves through cryptography should, given the
current state of understanding, not be legally restricted. A restriction
of the free use of such techniques can not, in this understanding, be
justified in a cost-benefit analysis.\" (BT/DS 13/11002, recommendation
13)

Magazine \"Der Spiegel\" reported on 8 January 1996 that the German
Ministry of the Interior is working on a draft law which would prohibit
(unescrowed?) cryptography. It published [another
article](http://www.iks-jena.de/mitarb/lutz/security/spiegel.en.html) in
December 1996 on impending restrictive legislation (see above).

See Ulf Moeller\'s [Kryptographie: Rechtliche
Situation](http://www.thur.de/ulf/krypto/verbot.html) (in German), an
[action page](http://www.crypto.de) by Nicolas Reichelt with many
newspaper articles (in German), and [more
documents](http://www.kuner.com/data/crypto/crypto.html) collected by
Christopher Kuner (mostly in English), including a list of [opinions of
political parties](http://www.kuner.com/data/crypto/edgov02.htm) (in
English). There is also an extensive [list of opinions and newspaper
reports](http://www.iks-jena.de/mitarb/lutz/security/cryptoban/) by Lutz
Donnerhacke.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Ghana]{#gh} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**

There are no import or export controls. \[Source: [2002 ITU
document](http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/e-strategy/Seminars/CapeVerde/AfricaLegalFramework1.pdf)\]

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
None. \[Source: [2002 ITU
document](http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/e-strategy/Seminars/CapeVerde/AfricaLegalFramework1.pdf)\]

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Greece]{#gr} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 5, 9\]

**1. Export/ import controls**

Greece has signed the [Wassenaar](#Wassenaar) Arrangement, so export
controls should be regulated according to the (pre-December 1998)
regulations, including the General Software Note.

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
None.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Hong Kong]{#hk} Special Administrative Region \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
Import, export, and transit of cryptography are regulated by the Import
and Export (Strategic Commodities) Regulations, which closely follow the
[Wassenaar](#Wassenaar) controls. Generally, a license is required from
the Director-General of Trade and Industry for importing or exporting
cryptography (symmetric over 56-bit key length), except for personal use
or for generally available, unchangeable crypto. Contravening the
licensing controls is punishable, on conviction on indictment, with an
unlimited fine or seven years\' imprisonment, and liable to
administrative sanctions. For more information, see the Strategic Trade
Controls Circular No. 12/04 on [Import and Export of Encryption
Products](http://www.stc.tid.gov.hk/english/circular_pub/stc12_04.html). 

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
There are no regulations on the use of encryption. Crypto products that
are to be connected to the public telecoms network, however, must comply
with the relevant Telecommunications Authority\'s network connection
specifications.

**3. Developments in cryptography regulation**\
The September 2000 [Report](http://www.info.gov.hk/sb/cr-rpt/report.htm)
of the Inter-departmental Working Group on Computer Related Crime
investigated the problem of cryptography for law enforcement. Ch. 5
recommends legislation for some form of decryption order. The order
should be modelled on current production orders of the Organized and
Serious Crimes Ordinance. As safeguards, the report recommends judicial
scrutiny, a requirement that the offence at issue has a maximum penalty
of at least two years\' imprisonment, and that there be legal protection
of the confidentiality of the information thus obtained. To enforce the
power, penalties \"commensurate with those for the specific offence
under investigation\" are recommended (although the report does not
suggest how the offence under investigation is to be determined if the
encrypted material does not yield evidence). Complying should be
possible by giving plain text or the necessary passwords, codes,
software and hardware to enable decryption. Suspects would be required
to comply, similar to suspects addressed with current production orders
(which do not have a privilege against self-incrimination clause).\
See [reactions](http://www.fipr.org/rip/index.html#HongKong) to the
report on FIPR\'s page.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Hungary]{#hu} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
[Wassenaar](#co) and [EU](#eu_exp) export controls are implemented
through the Government Decree No. 50/2004 *(III.23.) on Licensing
foreign trade in dual-use goods and technologies* ([text in
Hungarian](http://www.millenia.eu/cms/pdf/kettős%20felhasználású%20termékek%20és%20technológiák%20külkereskedelmi%20forgalma.pdf)),
updated with minor changes by Decree No. 13/2011 (II.22.) ([text in
Hungarian](http://www.complex.hu/jr/gen/hjegy_doc.cgi?docid=A1100013.KOR)).
Export of mass-market encryption software is exempted.\
Import of cryptography also falls under the Decree (see Part II): for
import from outside of the EU to Hungary, an International Import
Certificate is required (see artt. 14, 16ff).

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
A provision in the Hungarian [Digital Signature
Act](http://net.jogtar.hu/jr/gen/hjegy_doc.cgi?docid=A0100035.TV) (text
in Hungarian), which entered into force on 1 September 2001, holds that
signature-creation data (such as a cryptographic key) shall not be used
for other purposes than signing. The ministerial reasoning explains that
the intention of this is to prohibit the use of private keys for
cryptographic purposes, in the interest of national security. (Note that
cryptographic keys *not* used for creating signatures can be used for
encrypting.)

**3. Developments in cryptography regulation**\
In February 2001, the Data Protection Commissioner issued a
recommendation against regulating cryptography.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Iceland]{#ic} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 1\]

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
None.

**3. Developments in cryptography regulation**\
None.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [India]{#in} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 3, 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
India requires an import license for encryptors. Import of crypto
software is not restricted.

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
The [Information Technology Act
2000](http://www.eprocurement.gov.in/news/act2000mod.pdf) (No. 21 of
2000) contains a decryption order. The Controller of Certifying
Authorities may, according to art. 69 section 1, for national-security
or crime-prevention reasons, direct any agency of the Government to
intercept any information transmitted through any computer resource.
Subsequently, according to art. 69 section 2, the \"subscriber or any
person in charge of the computer resource shall, when called upon by any
agency which has been directed under sub-section (1), extend all
facilities and technical assistance to decrypt the information.\"
Failure to comply can be punished with imprisonment of up to seven
years, according to art. 69 section 3.

**3. Developments in cryptography regulation**\
None.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Indonesia]{#indon} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
There are no import restrictions for cryptographic products.

The export regulation is unclear. In any case, travellers with crypto
software on a laptop do not require a license.

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
I have had conflicting reports about crypto use: one source claims it is
illegal, whereas another source says there are no use restrictions.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Iran]{#iran} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
According to the 2005 HRW report [False
Freedom](http://hrw.org/reports/2005/mena1105/), use of encryption for
exchanging information requires a license. Users have to request
permission by submitting crypto algorithm and keys and information about
\'related parties\' to the Supreme Council for Cultural Revolution, as
regulated in art. 5.3.8 of the Rules and Regulations for Computer
Information Providers.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Ireland]{#ir} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 1, 9\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
Import is not controlled.

Export is regulated according to the [EU](#eu_exp) dual-goods regulation
and the [Wassenaar](#Wassenaar) Arrangement, including the restriction
of free export for mass-market software to 64-bit key lengths. The
*[Framework](http://www.irlgov.ie/tec/communications/signat.htm) for
Ireland\'s Policy on Cryptography and Electronic Signatures* of June
1998 and the [Consultation Paper](http://www.ecommercegov.ie/) of August
1999 affirm the commitment to this legislation.

The responsible agency is The Licensing Unit of the Department of
Enterprise, Trade and Employment (see [address](cls-addr.htm)).

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
The [Electronic Commerce Act
2000](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2000/en/act/pub/0027/print.html)
(nr. 27), which was enacted on 19 July 2000, contains a decryption order
in article 27 (2) (c). A judge can issue a search warrant if there are
reasonable grounds to suspect an offence under the Act has been
committed. Such a warrant authorises investigation officers, among other
things, \"when the thing seized is or contains information or an
electronic communication that cannot readily be accessed or put into
intelligible form, to require the disclosure of the information or
electronic communication in intelligible form\". Persons or public
bodies who fail or refuse to comply are guilty of a summary offence
(art. 27 (4)). Failure to comply is punishable, on summary conviction,
with a fine of up to 1500£ or imprisonment of up to one year or, on
conviction on indictment, with a fine of up to 500,000£ or up to five
years\' imprisonment (art. 8).\
According to article 28, \"Nothing in this Act shall be construed as
requiring the disclosure or enabling the seizure of unique data, such as
codes, passwords, algorithms, private cryptographic keys, or other data,
that may be necessary to render information or an electronic
communication intelligible.\" Hence, investigation officers can only
require people to decrypt, not to hand over keys or passwords, and the
power can only be used in relation to material seized during a search.
The Act does not make an exception for suspects or mention the privilege
against self- incrimination.

**History**\
The *[Framework](http://www.irlgov.ie/tec/communications/signat.htm) for
Ireland\'s Policy on Cryptography and Electronic Signatures* of June
1998 included the following basic principles: \"The production, import
and use of encryption shall not be subject to any regulatory controls
\'other than obligations relating to lawful access\'\", and
\"Legislation will be enacted to oblige crypto users to release
plaintext or crypto keys upon a lawful authorisation.\"\
The [Consultation Paper](http://www.ecommercegov.ie/) *Outline of
Legislative Proposals on electronic signatures, electronic contracts,
certification service provision and related matters* of August 1999 had
a smaller set of basic principles, including \"The production, import
and use of cryptography will continue to be free from regulation.\" So,
the lawful-access principle had been altered. The relevant [section
20](http://www.ecommercegov.ie/s20.html) of the Consultation Paper
entailed a power to search and seize, but it did not contain a provision
on requiring access to plaintext or crypto keys. According to the
explanatory note, this provision provided lawful access to evidence, and
it was not an enabler of mandatory key escrow or key recovery.

**3. Developments in cryptography regulation**\
The *[Framework](http://www.irlgov.ie/tec/communications/signat.htm) for
Ireland\'s Policy on Cryptography and Electronic Signatures* of June
1998 comprised the following basic principles:

-   Users shall have the right to access strong and secure encryption
    and to choose any cryptographic method.
-   The production, import and use of encryption shall not be subject to
    any regulatory controls \"other than obligations relating to lawful
    access\".
-   Legislation will be enacted to oblige crypto users to release
    plaintext or crypto keys upon a lawful authorisation.

The [Consultation Paper](http://www.ecommercegov.ie/) *Outline of
Legislative Proposals on electronic signatures, electronic contracts,
certification service provision and related matters* of August 1999 has
a smaller set of basic principles:

-   E-commerce users have the right to access strong and secure
    encryption, and users have the right to choose any cryptographic
    method. (Does this mean that non-e-commerce users of cryptography do
    not have the right to access strong crypto?)
-   The production, import and use of cryptography will continue to be
    free from regulation.

On the history of the lawful-access principle, see above at 2.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Israel]{#is} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 3, 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
Import and export of cryptography require a license from the
Director-General of the Ministry of Defence (who is aided in this by an
advisory committee). The Director-General can grant a general license
for certain crypto to make it freely exportable. There is no specific
limit on key size. Licenses are granted on a case-by-case basis;
according to the statistics
([2002](http://www.mod.gov.il/encryption/pdfs/stat02.pdf), [Jan-Jun
2003](http://www.mod.gov.il/encryption/pdfs/stat_01012003_30062003.pdf))
most requests are granted. See [Encryption Controls in
Israel](http://www.mod.gov.il/pages/encryption/preface.asp) for the
applicable laws and the Ministry of Defence DDEC\'s
[policy](http://www.mod.gov.il/pages/encryption/policy.asp) of control
and licensing, where
[forms](http://www.mod.gov.il/pages/encryption/forms.asp) are available
for requesting a license.

See the [address](cls-addr.htm) list for contact details.

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
Engagement in means of cryptography (including use, manufacture,
transport, and distribution) is
[regulated](http://www.mod.gov.il/encryption/preface.asp) and requires a
license from the Director-General of the Ministry of Defence (who is
aided in this by an advisory committee). The Director-General can grant
a general license for certain crypto that is subsequently free for use
or distribution. Persons are exempted from applying for a license for
engagement if they purchase from a license holder for sale and
distribution, or if they download the crypto from the Internet for
personal use.

According to an
[article](http://www.netvision.net.il/~ravia/articles.htm) (click on
\"The New Code Order\") by Haim Ravia, the applicable laws are:

-   Control of Commodities and Services (Weapons and Security Know-How)
    Declaration, 5747-1986
-   Control of Exports (Weapons and Military Know-How) Order, 5737-1977
-   Control of Commodities and Services Law, 5718-1957
-   Control of Commodities and Services (Engagement in Means of
    Encryption) Order, 5734-1974
-   Commodities and Services (Engagement in Means of Encryption)
    (Amendment) Declaration, 5758-1998
-   Commodities and Services (Engagement in Means of Encryption)
    (Amendment) Order, 5758-1998

See [Encryption Control
Regulations](http://www.mod.gov.il/encryption/preface.asp) and the
[Encryption Policy](http://www.mod.gov.il/encryption/policy.asp) of the
Ministry of Defence DDEC for the applicable laws.

Apparently, licenses are virtually always granted. No prosecutions for
using unlicensed crypto are known, and strong encryption is widely used
in Israel. See the Ministry of Defence DDEC\'s
[policy](http://www.mod.gov.il/encryption/policy.asp) of control and
licensing, where [forms](http://www.mod.gov.il/encryption/forms.asp) are
available for requesting a license.

See the [address](cls-addr.htm) list for contact details.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Italy]{#it} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 1, 3, 5, 8\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
Export is regulated according to the [EU](#eu_exp) regulations. Italy
has signed the [Wassenaar](#Wassenaar) Arrangement, including the
(pre-December 1998) General Software Note. See the law 185/90, New Norms
on the control of export, import and transit of arms materials.

The ministry responsible for crypto export is the [Ministero delle
Attività Produttive (area Commercio estero)](http://www.mincomes.it).

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
There is a law that demands accessibility of encrypted records for the
treasury.

There is also a law that requires radio-amateurs to transmit in
plaintext or in code from internationally accepted code books ([art.
330](http://digilander.libero.it/hamweb/norme/cp-ham.htm) Codice Postale
jo. art. 32 D.P.R. 447/2001).

Use of cryptography is also sometimes mandated by law. The Data
Protection Act, as amended by the 2003 New Privacy Code (Nuovo Codice
sulla Privacy), in force since 1 Jan 2004, requires in Annex B, art.
19.8, encryption (\"cifratura\") (or anonymisation) of personal data
that can disclose information about the health or sexual life of an
individual. Likewise, art. 24 of Annex B requires that electronic
transfer of genetic personal data outside of the premises reserved for
their processing (e.g., outside of the medical institution holding such
data) is encrypted (\"cifrato\"). The text of the New Privacy Code can
be found at the Italian Data Protection Authority\'s
[website](http://www.garanteprivacy.it/garante/navig/jsp/index.jsp?folderpath=Normativa%2FItaliana%2FIl+Codice+in+materia+di+protezione+dei+dati+personali){target="_blank"}.

**3. Developments in cryptography regulation**\
A 1992 proposal by the Minister of the Interior would have introduced a
licensing scheme for encryption and would have required producers and
importers of cryptography to deposit keys with the Ministry of Post and
Telecommunications. The proposal expired with the dissolution of the
parliament. A second, slightly modified version was never transformed
into a law proposal. Italy has apparently not thought of using Trusted
Third Parties for judicial access to keys.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Japan]{#ja} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 1, 3, 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
Export regulations are designed to implement the (pre-December 1998)
[Wassenaar](#Wassenaar) Arrangement, including the General Software
Note. Decisions are made on an individual basis. Japan seems to have
tightened its export controls in October 1996 (allegedly under US
pressure), establishing that businesses acquire approval for a
cryptography export order larger than 50,000 yen. In July 2000, MITI
announced its intention to mitigate the export controls for encryption
software for Internet use. 

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
None.

**3. Developments in cryptography regulation**\
Japan sees encryption as an important tool for establishing information
security in electronic commerce. Although initially it did not consider
encryption a threat to law enforcement or national security, Japan\'s
attitude seems to have shifted somewhat; the government has not (yet)
decided which approach to choose. See Stewart A. Baker\'s article [Japan
Enters the Crypto
Wars](http://www.hotwired.com/wired/4.09/es.crypto.html).

Japan\'s proposed wiretap law contains a reference to cryptography: if
encryption renders partial eavesdropping or wiretapping difficult,
law-enforcement is allowed to record all communications taking place.

The Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI) (now called
[METI](http://www.meti.go.jp/english/)) published a draft policy paper
\"[Towards the Age of the Digital
Economy](http://www.meti.go.jp/english/aboutmeti/data/a228101e.html)\"
in May 1997. For ensuring security, encryption and authentication
technologies should be sophisticated through market competition.
Development of cryptography and experiments of projects should be
promoted, and network users should be provided with much more
information about these, according to the draft.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Kazakhstan]{#ka} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
The import and export is governed by Resolution No. 1037 Article 266 (30
June 1997) and Regulation No. 29. For importing or exporting
cryptographic products, a license is required from the Licensing
Commission of the Committee of National Security. The decisions of this
Committee are subject to judicial review.\
The regulation is not enforced for travellers with crypto software on
their laptops (a personal-use exemption).

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
Cryptography is controlled by Resolution No. 967, Article 240 (13 June
1997) and Regulation No. 27. A license from the Committee of National
Security is required for the development (including research),
manufacture, repair (including technical support), and sale (including
use and advertising) of cryptographic products.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Kenya]{#ken} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
There are no import controls. \[Source: [2002 ITU
document](http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/e-strategy/Seminars/CapeVerde/AfricaLegalFramework1.pdf)\]

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
There is no requirement for key escrow, nor any restriction on key size.
\[Source: [2002 ITU
document](http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/e-strategy/Seminars/CapeVerde/AfricaLegalFramework1.pdf)\]

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Kyrgyzstan]{#ky} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
There are no export controls.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Latvia]{#la} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 4, 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
Export controls in line with the [EU dual-use regulation](#eu_exp).
Import controls mirror the export controls, i.e., an import license is
required if export is controlled.

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
There is no domestic restriction of cryptography.

**3. Developments in cryptography regulation**\
None.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Lithuania]{#li} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
Lithuania has signed the [Wassenaar](#Wassenaar) Arrangement, and export
controls are regulated according to these regulations, by law of 25 June
1998 amending the [Law Concerning Control of Import, Transit and Export
of Strategic Goods and
Technologies](http://www3.lrs.lt/cgi-bin/preps2?Condition1=145348&Condition2=)
(see also the [current
version](http://www3.lrs.lt/cgi-bin/preps2?Condition1=172393&Condition2=),
in Lithuanian). Licenses for export can be obtained from the Ministry of
Economy.

Import controls do not seem to be distinguished from export controls,
and so, import licenses would be required for the listed crypto
products.

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
None.

**3. Developments in cryptography regulation**\
None.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Luxembourg]{#lu} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
Luxembourg has signed the [Wassenaar](#Wassenaar) Arrangement, so export
controls should be regulated according to the (pre-December 1998)
regulations, including the General Software Note.

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
None.

**3. Developments in cryptography regulation**\
A draft *Law on Electronic Commerce* ([text](http://www.etat.lu/ECO/) in
French, Word; [text](http://www.telepathic.com/lux) in French, html) was
proposed in mid-1999. It affirms in article 2 that the use of
cryptography is free. Because cryptography is one of the major problems
for law enforcement, the draft proposes a new article 66-1 in the Code
of Criminal Procedure. The investigating judge (and only he) can command
someone whom he considers to have a specific knowledge of the
encryption, to give him access to the \"understanding of the seized
protected or encrypted data\" (\"donne accès (\...) à la compréhension
de données saisies protégées ou cryptées\"). The command can not be
given to a suspect; the persons protected in articles 72, 73 and 76 of
the CCP and persons who are obliged to keep secret information given
them in the course of their professional activities, can excuse
themselves. Otherwise, the person addressed is required to cooperate,
under threat of a fine of LuxF 100,000 maximum.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Malaysia]{#mal} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
There are no export or import restrictions.

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
There is no regulation of crypto use.

Three Acts contain a power to require people to decrypt *during a
search*; such a search is allowed when there is reasonable cause to
believe that an *offence under the Act at issue* is being or has been
committed. There is therefore no general power to order decryption.

-   Art. 10 (1) (b) of the [Computer Crimes Act
    1997](http://www.mycert.mimos.my/crime.html) requires (likely) users
    and people otherwise concerned with the operation of computers or
    material, during a search, to provide reasonable assistance for the
    purpose of accessing programs or data or material that is reasonably
    suspected to be used in connection with an offence under the Act, as
    well as to produce any information contained in a computer and
    accessible from the premises to be produced in a form in which it
    can be taken away and in which it is visible and legible. Refusal to
    cooperate is punishable with at most 25k ringgit and/or three
    years\' imprisonment (art. 11).
-   Art. 79 of the [Digital Signature Act
    1997](http://www.cca.gov.my/1997.htm) requires people, during a
    search, to give access to computerised data whether stored in a
    computer or otherwise, which includes providing the necessary
    password, encryption code, decryption code, software or hardware
    required to enable comprehension of computerised data. Refusal to
    cooperate is punishable with at most 200k ringgit and/or four
    years\' imprisonment (art. 83).
-   Art. 249 of the [Communications and Multimedia
    Act](http://www.cmc.gov.my/akta588/eng/legis_cma1998_pg3.htm)
    requires people, during a search, to give access to computerised
    data whether stored in a computer or otherwise, which includes
    providing the necessary password, encryption code, decryption code,
    software or hardware required to enable comprehension of
    computerised data. Refusal to cooperate is punishable with at most
    100k ringgit and/or two years\' imprisonment (art. 242). This Act
    contains a provision (art. 256(2)) allowing people to refuse
    answering questions if they thereby would incriminate themselves; by
    contrast, the privilege against self-incrimination can be deemed not
    to hold for complying with a decryption order.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Mauritius]{#mau} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
There are no export or import controls. \[Source: [2002 ITU
document](http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/e-strategy/Seminars/CapeVerde/AfricaLegalFramework1.pdf)\]

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
There are no domestic restrictions on cryptography for civilian use.
\[Source: [2002 ITU
document](http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/e-strategy/Seminars/CapeVerde/AfricaLegalFramework1.pdf)\]

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Mexico]{#me} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 3, 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
There are no export or import controls.

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
There are no restrictions on crypto use.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Moldova]{#mol} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
For import and export of cryptography, a license from the Ministry of
National Security was required through Government Decision No. 859 of 13
August 1998. This Decision was repealed by article 5 of Government
Decision No. 893 of 28 August 2001 ([text in
Moldovan](http://lex.justice.md/md/295447/)). I am not aware of any
follow-up or additional legislation.

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
For use of cryptography, a license from the Ministry of National
Security was required through Governmental Decision No. 859 of 13 August
1998. This Decision was repealed by article 5 of Government Decision No.
893 of 28 August 2001 ([text in
Moldovan](http://lex.justice.md/md/295447/)). I am not aware of any
follow-up or additional legislation.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Morocco]{#mor} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
Import and export of cryptography requires a license from the
government, according to Art. 13 of [Law No.
53-05](http://droitmaroc.wordpress.com/2008/01/29/loi-n°-53-05-relative-a-lechange-electronique-de-donnees-juridiques-integrale/)
(see under 2. Domestic laws). If the crypto only has the goal of
ensuring authenticity or integrity, then prior declaration to the
government suffices.** **

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
[Law No.
53-05](http://droitmaroc.wordpress.com/2008/01/29/loi-n°-53-05-relative-a-lechange-electronique-de-donnees-juridiques-integrale/)
of 30 November 2007 on Electronic Data Exchange (Loi 53-05 relative à
l\'échange électronique de données juridiques) inter alia regulates
cryptography services. Provision, utilisation (*exploitation*) and use
of cryptography requires a license from the government (Art. 13). (If
the crypto only has the goal of ensuring authenticity or integrity, then
prior declaration to the government suffices.) The government can
determine simplified regimes for certain types of crypto or for certain
user categories.

The provisioning of cryptography means and services is exclusively
reserved for electronic certification providers, and their personnel
must be approved by the government (Art. 14).

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [The Netherlands]{#nl} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 3, 4, 5, 7\]

[**1. Export/ import controls**]{#nl_imp}\
[Wassenaar](#co) rules, including the (pre-December 1998) General
Software Note. (The regulation was to be adapted according to the
December 1998 Wassenaar changes before April 1999.) The applicable
regulations are the 1962 Law on Import and Export (*In- en uitvoerwet*),
the Decree on Export of Strategic Goods and its Annex (*In- en
uitvoerbesluit strategische goederen*), and the 2006 Regulation on
penalisation of unallowed transfer of software and technology of
strategic goods by electronic media, faxes or telephone (*Regeling
houdende strafbaarstelling van ongeoorloofde overdracht van
programmatuur etc.*). All Dutch laws can be found at
[wetten.overheid.nl](http://wetten.overheid.nl).

The licensing authority is the *Afdeling Exportcontrole en
Sanctiebeleid* of the Ministry of Economic Affairs (see
[address](cls-addr.htm)). Technical details of license applications are
reviewed by the *Nationaal Bureau voor Verbindingsbeveiliging*. For more
information, see the Ministry\'s general [export
controls](http://www.rijksoverheid.nl/onderwerpen/exportcontrole-strategische-goederen)
page. 

[**2. Domestic laws and regulations**]{#nl_dom}\
[*Decryption command (law enforcement)*\
If encrypted information is found in a computer during a house
search,]{#nl_decr} the police can order anyone who can reasonably be
supposed to know the means of encryption to decrypt the information
(article 125k section 2 Dutch Code of Criminal Procedure (DCCP)). The
command cannot be given to a suspect, and persons with a right to
non-disclosure can refrain from complying (article 125k para. 3 DCCP).
(Through an oversight of the legislator, the former provision covering
these privileges, art. 125m-old DCCP, was abolished on 1 January 2006
(in the Data Delivery Act, see below) without being replaced,
temporarily - and unintentionally - abolishing the privilege against
self-incrimination in case of decryption orders for 8 months, until it
was repaired by the Computer Crime II Act (*Staatsblad* 2006, 300), in
effect as of 1 September 2006, introducing art. 125k para. 3.)

If encrypted information is found in data delivered to the police on the
basis of data-delivery orders (artt. 126nc-nf, 126uc-uf and 126zk-zn
DCCP), the police can order anyone who can reasonably be supposed to
know the means of encryption to decrypt the information; the command
cannot be given to a suspect, and persons with a right to non-disclosure
can refrain from complying (art. 126nh, 126uh and 126zp DCCP). These
provisions were introduced together with the data-delivery powers in the
Data Delivery Act (*Wet bevoegdheden vorderen gegevens*), *Staatsblad*
2005, 390, in force since 1 January 2006; art. 126zp was introduced by
the Extension of Terrorism Investigation Act (*Staatsblad* 2006, 580)
which allows terrorism investigations without probable cause. The Data
Delivery Act was based on the Mevis Committee on Investigatory Data
Gathering in the Information Society with its May 2001
[report](http://www.minjust.nl/c_actual/rapport/gegevens.pdf) (in
Dutch). According to the report, the proposed data-delivery orders would
include an indication of the way in which the data are to be handed
over, which implies that the data have to be produced in plaintext (see
p. 82).

If encrypted communications were intercepted through wiretapping, the
police can similarly order anyone who can reasonably be supposed to know
the means of encryption to decrypt the communication (art. 126m para. 6,
126t para. 6 and 126zg para. 5 DCCP). The command cannot be given to a
suspect, and persons with a right to non-disclosure can refrain from
complying (paras. 7 and 8). 

Failure to comply with any of these orders is punishable with up to
three months\' imprisonment (art. 184 Dutch Criminal Code).

[*Decryption command (telecom providers)*\
In case of a lawful wiretap, telecoms providers]{#nl_telecom} are
required to undo encryption they themselves have applied, according to
article 2 under e of the Wiretapping of Public Telecommunications
Networks and Services Decree (*Staatsblad* 1998, 642, as adapted by the
Decree of 5 June 2001, *Staatsblad* 2001, 262, available at
[www.overheid.nl/op/](http://www.overheid.nl/op/)).  

[*Decryption command and powers (security services)*]{#nl_dec_sec}\
The Intelligence and Security Services Act 2002 (*Wet op de inlichtingen
en veiligheidsdiensten 2002*, *Staatsblad* 2002, 148, available in Dutch
at [www.overheid.nl/op/](http://www.overheid.nl/op/)), grants a power to
the national-security services to request decryption. Anyone who has
knowledge of the decryption of encrypted data (encountered by security
services when they hack computers (article 24, section 3) or intercept
telecommunications (article 25, section 7)) is required to provide all
necessary cooperation to decrypt upon written request by the head of the
service. Failure to comply with the request is punishable with up to six
months\' imprisonment if it was not intentional, and with up to two
years\' imprisonment if the not-complying was intentional (art. 89).

The services also have the power to install technical provisions in
order to disable encryption of the data stored or transmitted in the
computers they hack (article 24, section 1 at b). Moreover, the
intelligence and security service are granted the power to disable
encryption of data, telecommunications, or data transfers (article 25,
section 1, article 26, section 1, and article 27, section 1).

**3. Developments in cryptography regulation**

[**1994 pre-draft law**]{#nl_1994}\
In March 1994, a Dutch predraft law on cryptography leaked out, the
drift of which was a prohibition of having, using, or trading strong
cryptography. Those with a \"legitimate concern\" could apply for a user
license or a trade authorization. One condition for granting a license
was giving information to an administration agency; the text did not
state whether this information concerned only the algorithm or also all
the keys used.

See the text of the
[Voorontwerp](http://dejoode.org/law/voorontwerp.html) and [Memorie van
Toelichting](http://dejoode.org/law/memorie.html) (in Dutch).

After many protests from those who would be affected by the proposed
regulation, it was withdrawn. The Dutch authorities are currently
studying on alternatives to handle the issue. Although the draft
regulation will not be continued in its present scope, it shows how much
the national-security and judicial authorities fear wide dissemination
of strong cryptography.

At a December 1996 public debate on cryptography, representatives from
the Ministries of Economic Affairs, Transport (responsible for
telecommunications) and the Interior clearly were in favour of the use
of a key-escrow scheme, in line with (their interpretation of) the OECD
discussions. Such a scheme would initially be voluntary and left to
market self-regulation. However, the Ministry of the Interior official
(responsible for national security) stated that, although he did not
think primarily of legislation, in the long run, use of non-escrowed
encryption could give rise to (criminal) suspicion by law-enforcement,
thus effectively mandating escrowed encryption.

**Extension of d**[**ecryption command (law
enforcement**]{#nl_dec_inv}**)**\
Initially, the draft Computer Crime Act II (version of January 1998)
also proposed to extend the power of the police to demand decryption to
be given to suspects, in case of grave evidence against the suspect and
if this is urgently necessary for finding the truth. After protests from
the legal community against this infringement of the privilege against
self-incrimination, this provision was deleted from the draft.

In 2011, however, a discussion on ordering suspects to decrypt
resurfaced in Parliament. The Minister of Security and Justice promised
to look at the UK legislation and to look into the compatibility with
the privilege against self-incrimination (see Letter of 10 June 2011, TK
32500-VI nr. 106, [in
Dutch](https://zoek.officielebekendmakingen.nl/kst-32500-VI-106.html)).
A report commissioned by the Ministry, published in November 2012
(available [in
Dutch](http://www.wodc.nl/onderzoeksdatabase/decryptiebevel-kinderpornografie.aspx),
summary [in
English](http://www.wodc.nl/images/ob305-summary_tcm44-484496.pdf)),
concluded that a decryption order to suspects is not incompatible with
the privilege against self-incrimination, provided that the law and
practice contain sufficient legal safeguards; the report identified
various options in which a decryption order to suspects could be shaped,
with varying forms and degrees of sanctioning non-cooperation. It
recommended that the decryption order could better be shaped according
to the rules for hearing suspects than according to the rules of seizure
of objects (as it is currently shaped in the law), but left it open for
political decision-making whether or not non-compliance should be
sanctioned and if so, what type and degree of sanction should be
applied. The Minister has subsequently announced, in a letter of 27
November 2012 (TK 33400-VI, nr. 68, [in
Dutch](https://zoek.officielebekendmakingen.nl/kst-33400-VI-68.pdf)) an
intention to propose a Bill to introduce a decryption order for suspects
in cases of child pornography or terrorist crimes, which can be given
only in written form, with authorisation from an investigating judge.
Non-cooperation would be sanctioned with a punishment that is
\"substantially higher than the punishment for not following a lawfully
given official order\" (which carries up to three months\'
imprisonment) - the choice for this sanctioning would be motived in the
Bill to follow.

[**Trusted Third Parties policy**]{#nl_ttp}\
A document on TTPs, *Nationaal TTP-project*, was submitted to parliament
on 3 June 1999 (TK 26 581)
([text](http://www.minvenw.nl/dgtp/sctgifs/930731649-1.doc) in Dutch).
This sets a framework for TTPs, proposing a number of preconditions for
TTPs who want to be part of a national TTP Chamber. For TTPs offering
confidentiality services, there is a precondition of \"lawgal access\",
but the document is not particularly clear on what this entails. There
is not a particular requirement for confidentiality TTPs to store or
recover private user keys.

For legal access, a \"partnership approach\" of government and industry
should develop a \"set of instruments acceptable to all parties\" that
ensures government access to encrypted data. This has been attempted in
a project \"Legal Access\" (*Rechtmatige toegang*), in which several
large companies, ministries and security services participated. The
project initially suggested that TTPs offering confidentiality services
would be required to operate in such a way that they could provide
access to their subscribers\' keys or plaintext (see the coordination
group\'s March 2001
[minutes](http://www.bof.nl/tappen/TTPnotulenmaart2001.pdf) in Dutch,
basing themselves on the [technical
report](http://www.bof.nl/tappen/RapportageTWRT.pdf) (in Dutch)).
However, given the economic consequences, it was found to be unfeasible
to establish a self-regulatory mechanism or to require confidentiality
TTPs to store keys. The government therefore decided to refrain from
measures for the time being, in the memorandum *Lawful access: options
deciphered* of 9 December 2002 (TK 26581, nr. 2, available at
[www.overheid.nl/op/](http://www.overheid.nl/op/)).\
Given this outcome, the earlier government threat of legislation
(according to the 1998 TTP document, \"If industry does not participate
sufficiently actively in developing said set of instruments, the
government will emphatically consider to fulfil the need for legal
access with further legislation\") will probably not be acted upon in
the near future.\
The [Mevis Committee
report](http://www.minjust.nl/c_actual/rapport/gegevens.pdf) (see above)
recommends that TTPs be required primarily to decrypt themselves, not to
hand over decryption keys (p. 83).

The overall TTP policy is being implemented in a project called TTP.NL,
with representatives of government and industry, which performs several
pilot projects. See for information in Dutch
[ECP.NL](http://www.ecp.nl/trust/ttp.htm).

**Policy statements emphasising the importance of cryptography**

The government\'s policy document \"Legislation for the electronic
highway\", of 12 February 1998 (TK 25 880), affirms that one of the
premises to be balanced in establishing law enforcement powers is that
the use of cryptography will remain free.

The government Memorandum *Vulnerability on the Internet* (*Nota KWINT*,
TK 26643, nr. 30) of July 2001 states that the government could
stimulate the use of cryptography by serving as a role model and use
cryptographic solutions in its own e-government security policy (p.
27). 

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [New Zealand]{#nz} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 1, 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
New Zealand has signed the [Wassenaar](#Wassenaar) Arrangement, which it
implemented verbatim in 1999. The current law includes the General
Technology Note of Wassenaar, which exempts public-domain software from
controls. For export of mass-market software, the Wassenaar restrictions
hold.\
Export of cryptography was regulated through the Customs Act 1966 and
the Export Prohibition Regulations of 1953, and since October 1996 by
the Customs and Excise Act 1996. The responsible agency is the
International Security and Arms Control Division (ISAC) of the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs and Trade (MFAT).

Approval is also required for software that does not itself contain
cryptography, but which has an interface specially designed for plugging
in cryptography. Export of crypto software by electronic means does not
fall under the export regulation.

Formerly, New Zealand did not implement the (pre-December 1998) General
Software Note of Wassenaar. A license was required to export
cryptography, including mass-market and public-domain software. What is
more, MFAT seemed to interpret the regulations very strictly, even to
the extent that publishing cryptography in books or academic journals
required permission, according to an [article by Peter
Gutman](http://www.cs.auckland.ac.nz/~pgut001/policy/index.html).
However, the export regulations did not seem to have been enforced.

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
None.

**3. Developments in cryptography regulation**\
None.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [North Korea]{#nk} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls\
**When requested to provide information about its encryption laws, the
government of the Democratic People\'s Republic of Korea stated that
they never release such information.

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
When requested to provide information about its encryption laws, the
government of the Democratic People\'s Republic of Korea stated that
they never release such information.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Norway]{#no} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 1, 5, 6, 8\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
Norway has signed the [Wassenaar](#Wassenaar) Arrangement, including the
(pre-December 1998) General Software Note. Export is regulated by the
Strategic Goods Export Control Act of 18 December 1987, nr. 93 ([Lov om
kontroll med eksport av strategiske varer, tjenester og teknologi
m.v.](http://www.lovdata.no/all/hl-19871218-093.html)) and the
accompanying regulations of 10 January 1989, nr. 51 ([Forskrift til
gjennomføring av utførselsreguleringen for strategiske varer, tjenester
og teknologi](http://www.lovdata.no/for/sf/ud/xd-19890110-0051.html)).
For more information, see the Norwegian Department of Foreign Affairs\'
[export
control](http://odin.dep.no/ud/engelsk/p2500832/p30003925/bn.html) page
(in English). A [list of
technologies](http://odin.dep.no/odinarkiv/norsk/dep/ud/2004/annet/032191-190003/ind-bn.html)
is available in Norwegian.

There are no import controls. The 2001 policy document (see below, at 3)
states that import of cryptography will remain free.

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
None.

**3. Developments in cryptography regulation**\
In August 2001, the Norwegian government released their Norwegian Crypto
Policy ([Norsk
kryptopolitikk](http://odin.dep.no/nhd/norsk/enorge/p10001878/024101-990058/index-dok000-b-n-a.html),
text in Norwegian). The policy in general takes a positive stance
towards cryptography, arguing its value for securing data and for the
economy. The policy declares itself against mandatory key-escrow, at
least as far as individuals\' use of cryptography for private purposes
and authentication-only cryptography are concerned. Local mandatory
key-escrow is, however, recommended for companies for internal use,
because of the risk of data loss when a crypto key is lost. The policy
also indicates that telecommunications service providers, including
Internet access providers, can be required to provide plaintext to the
government, if they are in possession of the plaintext or of the keys to
produce the plaintext.\
See also [A basis for developing an integrated national crypto
policy](http://www.afin.uio.no/forskning/notater/kryptopolitikk_rapport_final.pdf)
(text in Norwegian) by Lee Bygrave.

At the [OECD meeting](#oecd) of December 1995, Norway called in question
the use of Trusted Third Parties for judicial access to keys.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Pakistan]{#pa} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
The Pakistan Telecommunication (Reorganization) Act empowers the
government to regulate cryptography. The sale and use of encryption
hardware and software require approval by the PTA (Pakistan
Telecommunications Authority?).

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Peru]{#pe} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
There are no import or export controls on cryptography software.

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
There are no domestic laws regarding encryption.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Philippines]{#phi} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
E-mail encryption is not restricted.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Poland]{#po} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
A license is required for exporting encryption software or hardware, in
accordance with the [EU dual-use goods regulation](#eu_exp) and the
(pre-December 1998) [Wassenaar](#Wassenaar) Arrangement, including the
General Software Note.

Import of cryptography is regulated as well, through a 1993 law; a
general authorization or import certificate is required to buy
encryption products abroad. The end-user must detail the kind of
information to be encrypted and where the cryptography is to be
installed. Legitimate businesses will be helped with their application.
There is no need for declaration for crypto software exported from
abroad under the Wassenaar General Software Note.

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
None.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Portugal]{#pg} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 9\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
Portugal has signed the [Wassenaar](#Wassenaar) Arrangement, so export
controls should be regulated according to the (pre-December 1998)
regulations, including the General Software Note.

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
None.

**3. Developments in cryptography regulation**\
None.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Puerto]{#pu} Rico \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
There are no import controls.(See further [US law](#us_1).)

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
There are no restrictions on crypto use. (See further [US law](#us_2).)

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Romania]{#ro} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
There are no import controls.

Romania has signed the [Wassenaar](#Wassenaar) Arrangement, so export
controls should be regulated according to the (pre-December 1998)
regulations, including the General Software Note.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Russia]{#ru} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 3, 5, 7\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
A license is required for the importation of encryption facilities
manufactured abroad. The export of cryptography is subjected to a
tightened state control. Importers and exporters need licenses by the
Ministry of Trade. Russia has signed the [Wassenaar](#Wassenaar)
Arrangement, but does not implement the (pre-December 1998) General
Software Note; its regulations are more stringent than the Wassenaar
Arrangement.

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
On 3 April 1995, president Yeltsin issued a decree prohibiting
unauthorized encryption. State organizations and enterprises need a
license to use encryption (for both authentication and secrecy, for
storage as well as transmission). Other enterprises and organizations
using uncertified cryptography do not receive state orders. The Central
Bank shall take measures against commercial banks that do not use
certified cryptography when communicating with divisions of the Central
Bank.\
The development, production, sale, implementation, or operation of
cryptography without a license is prohibited. Apparently, a license is
also required for all users for using cryptography.

Licenses are issued by the Federal Security Service, FSB, in which the
former FAPSI (the Federal Bureau for Government Information, a former
department of the KGB) was integrated in 2003. The license process is
based on internal regulations.

The government intended to amend the domestic regulations on
cryptography, it announced in a Duma hearing on 18 May 2000. \[source:
World Internet Law Report 2000/8, p. 29\]

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Rwanda]{#rw} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**3. Developments in cryptography regulation**\
At a 1998 workshop on ICT Policy and Strategy in Rwanda, organised by
the Rwanda government, ECA, UNESCO and USAIS in December 1998, the
[draft
report](http://www.uneca.org/aisi/nici/country_profiles/rwanda/Rwanpap1.htm)
stated: \"Transparency as a rule in communication: encryption of
information should be regulated.\" It is not known whether this has led
to any concrete legislative proposals or legislation.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Saudi Arabia]{#sau} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 3, 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
There are no import or export controls, according to source \[3\].

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
It is reported that Saudi Arabia prohibits use of encryption, but that
this is widely ignored.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Singapore]{#si} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5, 10\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
Export is covered by [Wassenaar](#Wassenaar) controls. See the
[Strategic Goods (Control)
Act](http://www.stgc.gov.sg/stgc/index.jsp?url=/html/4_Legislation.html&artName=78&catName=46),
in force since 1 January 2003, and the [Strategic Goods (Control)
Regulations](http://www.stgc.gov.sg/stgc/index.jsp?url=/html/4_Legislation.html&artName=78&catName=46),
gazetted on 5 January 2004; the latter contains, among other things,
provisions on electronic transmission of technology. See generally the
[Strategic Goods Control](http://www.stgc.gov.sg/stgc/index.jsp)
website. 

Formerly, there were import restrictions (requiring a license from the
Trade Development Board), but these were abolished on 21 January 2000.

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
There are no domestic controls on crypto use, but according to the
Singapore Trade Development Board, \"hardware equipment that will be
connected directly to the telecommunications infrastructure will require
approval from the Telecommunications Authority (TA) of Singapore. This
is to ensure compliance and non-interference with telecommunications
requirements.\" \[source: [EPIC survey
2000](http://www2.epic.org/reports/crypto2000/countries.html#Heading108)\]

There is a general decryption order for offences in the Criminal
Procedure Code. Originally, the decryption order was introduced in art.
15 of the Computer Misuse Act, as amended in 1998 and in force since 27
February 1999, and restricted to offences under the Computer Misuse Act.
In 2005, by the [Statutes (Miscellaneous Amendments) (No. 2) Act
2005](http://app.supremecourt.gov.sg/data/doc/ManageHighlights/366/Statutes%20(Miscellaneous%20Amendments)%20(No%202)%20Act%202005.htm)
(No. 42 of 2005), the provision was transferred to a new art. 125B of
the Criminal Procedure Code (Cap. 68, 1985 Ed.), and could be applied to
all seizable offences. With the re-enactment of the Criminal Procedure
Code by Act 15 of 2010, the provision was moved to s. 40 and applies to
all arrestable offences. Section 40 of the [Criminal Procedure
Code](http://statutes.agc.gov.sg/aol/search/display/view.w3p;page=0;query=CompId:438d3ac1-0aa5-419a-a283-55122e09c04e;rec=0;resUrl=http://statutes.agc.gov.sg/aol/browse/titleResults.w3p;letter=C;type=actsAll)
(Cap. 68, Revised Edition 2012, available at
<http://statutes.agc.gov.sg/>) allows the Public Prosecutor to authorise
the police (or another authorised person) to \"access any information,
code or technology which has the capability of retransforming or
unscrambling encrypted data into readable and comprehensible format or
text for the purposes of investigating the seizable offence\", or to
require computer users (those reasonably suspected of using or having
used a computer in connection with a seizable offence, as well as
persons concerned with operating such a computer) \"to provide him with
such reasonable technical and other assistance\" to get access to
decryption information. Moreover, they are entitled to require any
person reaonably suspected to possess decryption information to grant
\"access to such decryption information necessary to decrypt data
required for the purposes of investigating the seizableoffence\".
Failing to comply with these orders is punishable with at most S\$10,000
or three years\' imprisonment. If, however, \"it is shown that the
encrypted data contains evidence relevant to the planning, preparation
or commission of a specified serious offence\", he can be punished with
the same punishment as applies to that offence, with a maximum of
S\$50,000 or ten years\' imprisonment. The list of specified offences,
in s. 40(5), refers to many national-security-related laws, but also to
kidnapping or \"any written law which provides for any offence involving
the causing of death or bodily harm\" (if the maximum of that offence is
at least 5 years\' imprisonment).

**3. Developments in cryptography regulation**\
The Infocomm Development Authority of Singapore [press
release](http://www.ida.gov.sg/Website/IDAContent.nsf/dd1521f1e79ecf3bc825682f0045a340/b862cb2072335c19c825686b003b85a9?OpenDocument)
of 19 January 2000 that announced the lifting of import controls,
strongly encouraged companies to implement key recovery.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Slovakia]{#sla} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
Slovakia has signed the [Wassenaar](#Wassenaar) Arrangement, so export
controls should be regulated according to the (pre-December 1998)
regulations, including the General Software Note.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Slovenia]{#sle} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
There are no restrictive domestic crypto laws or regulations.\
For transfer of sensitive personal data (e.g., on race, sex, health)
across telecommunications networks, the data must be protected by
encryption methods, according to art. 14(2) of the Personal Data
Protection Act (*Zakon o varstvu osebnih podatkov*). (See the
[article](http://matej.owca.info/privacy/PHR04_slovenia.pdf) by Matej
Kovacic about privacy in Slovenia.)

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [South Africa]{#sa} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 1, 3, 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
There are import and export controls for military cryptography, as
regulated by the Defense Armaments Development and Protection Act 1968,
No. R. 888, published May 13, 1994, and the General Armaments Control
Schedule. Import of cryptography from military suppliers abroad and
export of cryptography from military suppliers in South Africa are
controlled (a military supplier being a company who has developed the
technology specifically for sale to governments such as a government
military contractor). Otherwise crypto import and export is free.

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
Use of encryption is free for commercial or private organizations.

The provision of cryptography products or services, however, is strictly
regulated through Chapter V of the [Electronic Communications and
Transactions Act](http://www.internet.org.za/ect_act.html) of 31 July
2002, in force since 30 August 2002, and the implementing Cryptography
Regulations of 10 March 2006 (*Government Gazette* No. 28594). 

The Act has a broad scope: it includes the provision of cryptography
within South Africa, but also the provision to someone who is in South
Africa when he uses it, and to a person who uses it for the purpose of a
business carried on in South Africa. Thus, it includes providing
cryptography through the Internet to South Africans, providing crypto to
foreign subsidiaries of SA companies, and providing crypto to persons
who at one time or other will visit SA from abroad if they will use the
crypto within the country. (For a further discussion of the scope, see
the
[article](http://www.deneysreitz.co.za/pdf/news/WITHOUT%20PREJUDICE%2001%20May%202006%20Page%2028_29.pdf)
*Decoding the ECTA Cryptography Regulations* by Louw & Augustine.)\
Crypto providers can only operate after they have been registered, for
which they have to provide the registration authority (the
Director-General of the Department of Communications) with the
information required (art. 29-30 Act + additional information listed in
Art. 2 Regulations, including \'detailed profiles of trusted personnel\'
with \'supervisory or managerial responsibilities\'), and pay an
application and annual administration fee (art. 4 Regulations). The
providers have to disclose information to relevant authorities
investigating a crime, security agencies or cyber-inspectors (art.
31(2)). Violation of the law is punishable with up to two years\'
imprisonment (art. 32(2)).\
A draft version of the Regulations, the 1 September 2004 Notice inviting
Comment on Proposed Cryptography Regulations, also included as
information to be provided contact details of all customers to whom a
crypto product or service was provided in the preceding 6 months (art.
2(b)(vi), but this was struck in the final Regulations.

Before the ECT Act, there were some specific regulations that may still
apply. Use or supply of telecommunications facilities or equipment must
first be approved by [ICASA](http://www.icasa.org.za), the Independent
Communications Authority of South Africa (formerly SATRA), except on
explicit prescription by ICASA. This does not apply if the device is
connected between a modem or router and the computer. It is unclear
whether and to what extent \"telecommunications facilities or
equipment\" covers cryptography.\
Use or provision of cryptography by government bodies requires approval
from the relevant agency; likewise, crypto systems approved for
government use require approval from the relevant agency to be used by
commercial or private organizations.

Apart from restricting crypto services, there is also a power for the
police to demand decryption in case of encrypted telecommunications. The
[Regulation of Interception of Communications and Provision of
Communication-Related Information
Act](http://www.internet.org.za/ricpci.html) (No. 70, 2002), published
in the *Government Gazette* on 22 January 2003, gives the police the
power to request a designated judge to give a decryption direction (art.
21). This is possible before or during interception of
telecommunications according to the act. The addressee has to comply by
giving the decryption key or by providing decryption assistance (art.
29). Costs for decryption can be compensated (art. 31). Failure to
comply is punishable with a fine of up to 2 million Rand or imprisonment
of maximum 10 years for natural persons and employees, or a fine of 5
million Rand for organisations (juristic persons) (art. 51(4)). Numerous
detailed provisions and conditions apply, see articles 1, 21 and 29.
(Cf. also [Discussion Paper
99](http://wwwserver.law.wits.ac.za/salc/discussn/dp99.pdf) by the South
African Law Commission on Computer-related crime (also at
[2600](http://www.2600.co.za/articles/dp99.pdf)), which was to lead to a
Computer Misuse Act, but which has in the meantime been addressed by the
ECT Act and the RICPCRI Act. Section 4.5.3 under 4(b) of the report
proposed search and seizure powers, including the requiring of any
person concerned with a computer or computer data to provide \"the
reasonable assistance that may be required to facilitate the execution\"
of the search warrant.)

**3. Developments** **in cryptography regulation**\
None.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [South Korea]{#sk} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
Import of encryption devices is restricted in South Korea through a
government policy, not by legislation; it requires approval from the
Ministrry of Trade, Industry, and Energy. The import of encryption
devices is prohibited, even for banks. The government is considering a
law to give this a legal basis. The import of encryption software is not
controlled. However, one report claims that the import license system
was abolished several years ago.

South Korea has signed the [Wassenaar](#Wassenaar) Arrangement, so
export controls should be regulated according to the (pre-December 1998)
regulations, including the General Software Note.

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
It seems that encryption services provided within a public switch
telephone network can be restricted on an ad-hoc basis. There is no
regulation governing the use of encryption.

**3. Developments in cryptography regulation**\
Encryption policy is not published, despite a 1994 indication by the
Ministry of Information and Communication that a policy would be
published defining acceptable public, private, government, and telephone
uses of encryption services and approved algorithms. Enquiries with the
Ministry indicate it does not have plans for specific legislation.

Draft bills on electronic signatures and electronic commerce, however,
may affect crypto use. The Draft Electronic Commerce Basic Law seems to
oblige people to provide the government with crypto keys.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Spain]{#sp} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 1\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
Export of cryptography is controlled according to the (pre-December
1998) [Wassenaar](#co) and [EU](#eu_exp)regulations, including the
General Software Note. The international regulations are implemented in
the *Reglamento del Comercio Exterior de Material de Defensa y de Doble
Uso*, in force since 9 May 1998. The regulation does not make
distinctions based on key lenghts.

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
The General Telecommunications Law (text, **now outdated**, in
[Spanish](http://www.setsi.mcyt.es/legisla/teleco/lgt/indice.htm)) of 24
April 1998 provided in article 52 that all information transmitted
across telecommunications networks could be encrypted. Conditions on the
encryption procedures could be established in the decrees that implement
this law. The second paragraph of article 52 established that, if
encryption is used for confidentiality, an \"obligation could be imposed
to notify either a General Administration body, or a public organisation
about the algorithm or whatever encryption procedure is used, with an
effect to control it following prevailing normatives. This obligation
will affect all the developers which incorporate cryptography in their
equipments or devices, the operators that include it in their networks
or in the services they offer, and, if applicable, to the users that
employ it.\" (translation
[GILC](http://www.gilc.org/crypto/spain/gilc-crypto-spain-798.html)).
People have warned that this might lead to mandatory key escrow or key
recovery, if users would be obliged to \"notify\" the government about
the \"key procedure\". See an article of July 1998 of Fronteras
Electrónicas in
[English](http://www.gilc.org/crypto/spain/gilc-crypto-spain-798.html).\
The same article 52 of the General Telecommunications Law required
telecoms network and service providers who use encryption to accommodate
the General Administration Body with the decoding devices they employ.

The General Telecommunications Law was replaced by a new General
Telecommunications Law, 32/2003 of 3 November 2003 (text in
[Spanish](http://www.setsi.mcyt.es/legisla/teleco/lgt32_03/indice.htm),
see Title III, Chapter III). The crypto provision was transferred to
article 36. Para. 1 maintains that telecommunications may be encrypted.
Para. 2, however, was changed somewhat. It now reads: \"Encryption is an
instrument for information security. Among its conditions of use, when
it is used to protect the confidentiality of information, the obligation
may be imposed to notify a General Administration State authority or a
public authority, the algorithms or any other crypto procedure used, as
well as the obligation to facilitate without any cost the encryption
devices, in order to control it according to the law in force.\" The
impact of the change is unclear.

**3. Developments in cryptography regulation**\
See under 2.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Sweden]{#sv} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 3, 4, 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
The import of cryptography is not restricted, nor will it in the future,
according to the government\'s May 1999 Government Communication
1998/99:116 [On cryptography](http://cryptome.org/se-crypto99.htm).

Since 1 January 1995, Sweden restricts export of encryption according to
the [Wassenaar](#Wassenaar) Arrangement, including the General Software
Note. This regulation refers to the [EU](#eu_exp) regulation (1334/2000)
instead of maintaining a national list of controlled goods. The relevant
regulations are the *Law on control of dual-use goods and of technical
assistance* ([SFS
2000:1064](http://www.notisum.se/rnp/sls/lag/20001064.HTM)) of 30
November 2000, and the corresponding Decree ([SFS
2000:1217](http://www.notisum.se/rnp/sls/lag/20001217.HTM)) (that
replaced [SFS
1998:400](http://www.notisum.se/rnp/sls/lag/19980400.HTM)). 

The Inspection for Strategic Products keeps supervision and information
regarding the export controls ([SFS
1995:1680](http://www.notisum.se/rnp/sls/lag/19951680.HTM)).

The Government Policy [On
cryptography](http://cryptome.org/se-crypto99.htm) affirms the need for
export controls, but states that these should be gradually liberalised.
It stipulates that the regulations should explicitly place physical
export on an equal footing with electronic export (via computer
networks), so that Internet exports will also fall under the export
regulations.

A Foreign Affairs press release of 23 June 1999 announced that as of 1
August 1999, the Inspection for Strategic Products has the power to
proclaim rules for general export licenses for crypto products. The
general export license published (TFS 1999:40, 1 July 1999) allows
crypto exports of up to 128-bit symmetric mass-market crypto to a list
of about 60 approved countries (Argentina, Australia, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Brazil, Bolivia, Brunei, Bulgaria, Canada, Chechnya, Chile,
China, Cyprus, Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, Hong Kong SAR, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Israel, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lithuania, Macao SAR, Macedonia, Malaysia, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco,
New Zealand, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, the Philippines, Poland, Qatar,
Rumania, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Africa, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Switzerland, Taiwan, Thailand, Tunisia,
Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates, Venezuela, Vietnam).
Transport within the European Union is not considered export, so any
crypto transfer is allowed. For other countries and products, an
individual license is required. (See a
[paper](http://www.iD2tech.com/whitepapers/export.htm) with information
about the application process.)

A report from the Swedish Cabinet Office (Regeringskansliet),
[Cryptography Policy: Possible Courses of Action for
Sweden](%20%20%20http:/www.ud.se/english/press/publicat/crypto.pdf) (in
pdf) (original [Kryptopolitik - möjliga svenska
handlingslinjer](http://www.ud.se/pressinf/proposou/krypthel.pdf)in
Swedish), from October 1997, set out the basis for discussion on a
national crypto policy. It took as starting points that import of
cryptography would continue to be free, and that the export controls
would remain.

In February 1998, a Swedish company, Idonex, published the government\'s
ruling that they could not export 128-bit crypto via ftp; they were
granted an export license for 40-bit. The decision leaves unclear
whether electronic export (through ftp) is covered by the controls or
not. See the English [info page](http://www.roxen.com/crypto/).

See also section 5.2 of Simo-Pekka Parviainen\'s
[thesis](http://ethesis.helsinki.fi/julkaisut/oik/julki/pg/parviainen/).

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
The use of cryptography in decoding equipment for encoded transmissions
of radio and television programmes is regulated in law 1993:1367 on the
prohibition of certain forms of decoding equipment (source: Government
Communication 1998/99:116 [On
cryptography](http://cryptome.org/se-crypto99.htm)).\
For the rest, there are no laws regulating cryptography domestically.

**3. Developments in cryptography regulation**\
The Swedish IT commission, which advises the government on strategic
questions in the information technology field, released a report (SOU
1997: 73) in May 1997, *Inför en svensk policy för Säker Elektronisk
Kommunikation* (Towards a Swedish Policy for Secure Electronic
Communications). It recommended that no restrictions on the use of
cryptography should be introduced. The trust in ICT could be severely
reduced, and the prerequisites for maintaining an effective key
management system are lacking. The commission dismissed the various
forms of key management systems for private keys, such as key deposits
and key recovery. The fight against serious crime and terrorism should
use other police and security measures. The Swedish government should
quickly make up its mind, so that it can influence the international
work in the field, according to the commission. See the statement by the
IT commission [Avseende användning av
kryptering](http://www.itkommissionen.se/itsite/pages/missiv/mi970526.htm)
(in Swedish).

Computer Sweden magazine, in July 1997, could not find anyone (who knows
anyone) willing to publicly favor mandatory key deposits.

Sweden outlined its crypto policy in the 6 May 1999 Government
Communication 1998/99:116 [On
cryptography](http://cryptome.org/se-crypto99.htm). This affirms that
there is at present no reason to limit the use of cryptography in
Sweden. All shall have the right to choose such technologies themselves.
\"If developments should warrant more stringent regulations, the
government will consider appropriate measures for creating means of
legal access to the plaintext of encrypted information for law
enforcement and supervisory authorities.\"\
Although the government does not encourage key recovery, the
Communication says that government authorities themselves should use key
management systems with built-in functions for key recovery. For this,
internal key-management bodies probably must be set up. Such bodies
should be regulated \"in such a way that they can serve as a model for
the private market too.\" Moreover, the government should investigate
whether there are reasons for the State to involve itself in a voluntary
authorisation procedure of special TTPs that provide confidentiality
services.

Before deciding upon this policy, Sweden discussed crypto policy in view
of the discussions within the EU and the OECD. The October 1997 report
by the Cabinet Office (Regeringskansliet), [Cryptography Policy:
Possible Courses of Action for
Sweden](%20%20http:/www.ud.se/english/press/publicat/crypto.pdf) (in
pdf) (original [Kryptopolitik - möjliga svenska
handlingslinjer](http://www.ud.se/pressinf/proposou/krypthel.pdf)in
Swedish), set out the basis for this discussion. The three starting
points of the report were:

-   \"everybody has the right to use cryptography in order to secure
    stored data and communication\";
-   \"prerequisites for Swedish users\' voluntary deposit of their keys
    in Sweden should be created in response to the requirements of key
    deposit\";
-   \"in order to enable law enforcement agencies to fight terrorism and
    drug dealers, rules and regulations for lawful access to plaintext
    and keys must be installed\".

The report considered as a possible solution for balancing
law-enforcement and user needs the voluntary deposit of private crypto
keys, with legal access. It assumed that \"many countries\" will impose
mandatory key deposits, and in order to facilitate communication with
those countries, possibilities should be created for law enforcement to
cooperate, either through key deposits in both countries or through
international agreements.\
For national traffic in Sweden, the report considered that the current
policy of free crypto use will be continued, and monitored \"from time
to time, how the various interests are balanced\".

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Switzerland]{#su} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 1, 3, 5, 9\][](http://www.admin.ch/bawi/f/kontroll/gkge.pdf)

**1. Export/ import controls**\
Crypto import is not controlled. Import certificates will be given if
the country of origin requires this.

The export of cryptography is regulated by the Goods Control Decree of
25 June 1997 (*Verordnung über die Aus-, Ein- und Durchfuhr zivil und
militärisch verwendbarer Güter sowie besonderer militärischer Güter*)
(text in [German](http://www.admin.ch/ch/d/sr/c946_202_1.html) or
[English](http://www.admin.ch/bawi/f/kontroll/gkve.pdf)), which is based
on the Goods Control Law of 13 December 1996 (text in
[German](http://www.admin.ch/ch/d/sr/c946_202.html) or
[English](http://www.admin.ch/bawi/f/kontroll/gkge.pdf)), in force since
1 October 1997. The export controls mirror the (pre-December 1998)
[Wassenaar](#Wassenaar) Arrangement, including the General Software Note
which excludes mass-market and public-domain software from the controls.
Export to the about 25 members of the four international export control
regimes (Australia Group, Missile Technology Control Regime, Nuclear
Suppliers Group, Wassenaar Arrangement) requires an ordinary general
license issued within a few days; export to other countries requires an
individual license, although for exports to *bona fide* companies in
uncritical countries, an extraordinary general license may be given.
Crypto export through intangible means is covered by these regulations.

Re-export is not permitted if the country of origin does not allow the
export to the destination country.

See the [information
page](http://www2.seco-admin.ch/seco/seco2.nsf/dieSeite/AWP_ExpKont_ExpKont?OpenDocument&l=de&HauptRessort=4)
of the State Secretary of Economic Affairs (German).

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
Study \[1\] did not find cryptography regulations, but its follow-up
study \[9\] claims there was a restriction on the use of certain
cryptography: radio communications must remain understandable, and if a
person wants to encrypt messages for professional reasons, he must
obtain specific permission. This is presumably the same law as the paper
to the [OECD](#oecd) December 1995 meeting refers to: article 14 of the
Telecommunications Concession Regulation (VFKV) required a license for
radio traffic encryption; the license was given if the concessionaire
can prove he needs confidentiality of his messages.\
The VFKV regulation were replaced on 1 January 1998 by the Frequency
Management and Radio License
[Decree](http://www.admin.ch/ch/d/sr/7/784.102.1.de.pdf) (Verordnung
ueber Frequenzmanagement und Funkkonzessionen, FKV, current version from
9 March 2007). There is no license requirement for radio encryption, but
article 10 on identification of broadcasts provides that if the radio
traffic is not conducted in plain speech, the License Board will
establish how identification of the traffic is to take place (para. 2),
and the Board can rquire to make available the contents of the radio
traffic (para. 3).

Encryption products that can be connected to a public telecommunications
network must follow certain basic technical requirements, posed by the
Swiss Federal Council, to ensure overall compatibility. This can be done
by a declaration of conformity issued by the manufacturer, or by a
review by the Federal Office for Communications (OFCOM).

Apart from these two specific regulations, there are no domestic crypto
regulations.

**3. Developments in cryptography regulation**\
None.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Syria]{#sy} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
According to the 2005 HRW report [False
Freedom](http://hrw.org/reports/2005/mena1105/), there is no law
regulating use of encryption in electronic communications. 

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Thailand]{#th} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
The Thailand Computer Crime Act, B.E. 2550 of 2007 (see [unofficial
translation](http://www.prachatai.com/english/node/117){target="_blank"})
contains a decryption order in computer-crime cases. Chapter 2, section
18 allows officials investigating a computer crime, with court approval,
to \"decode any person\'s computer data or instruct any person related
to the encryption of computer data to decode the computer data or
cooperate with a relevant competent official in such decoding\".
According to section 27 of the Act, failure to comply with a decryption
order is punishable by a fine of up to 200,000 baht \"and a further
daily fine of not more than five thousand baht until the relevant
corrective action has been taken\". The latter could imply that a person
can be given daily fines until s/he cooperates with decryption.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Tonga]{#to} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
The [Tonga Computer Crimes
Act](http://www.paclii.org/to/legis/num_act/cca2003185/) (also [text in
pdf](http://www.coe.int/t/dghl/cooperation/economiccrime/cybercrime/documents/countryprofiles/tonga%20ComputerCrimesAct.pdf)),
Act 14 of 2003, contains a decryption order which can be given in all
cases in which a computer or data storage medium can provide evidence of
an offence (or which has been acquired as a result of an offence).
Article 10 of the Act stipulates that persons in possession or in
control of such a computer, data, or storage medium has to provide
assistance in allowing the officer conducting the search to access the
computer or data, and to \"obtain an intelligible output from a computer
system in a format that can be read\". Failure to assist is punishable
with a fine of up to T\$10,000 or maximum 2 years\' imprisonment.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Trinidad & Tobago]{#tt} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
The [Computer Misuse Act,
2000](http://www.ttcsweb.org/bill/compbill.pdf), passed in October 2000,
contains a decryption order. Clause 16 provides that a \"police officer
executing a warrant (\...) is entitled (\...) to (\...) have access to
any information, code or technology which has the capability of
retransforming or unscrambling encrypted program or data held in or
available to such computer into readable and comprehensible format or
text for the purpose of investigating any offence under this Act or any
other offence which has been disclosed in the course of the lawful
exercise of the powers under this section; (\...) and entitled to
require any person in possession of decryption information to grant him
or the authorised person access to such decryption information necessary
to decrypt data required for the purpose of investigating an offence.\"
Failure to comply with a decryption order can be punished with a fine of
fifteen thousand dollars and imprisonment for two years.\
See a summary and some comments on the act at
[TTCS](http://www.ttcsweb.org/compbill.htm#misusebill). 

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Tunisia]{#tun} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
Import of cryptography is restricted. It seems a government agency
(Centre d'Etudes et de Recherches des Télécoms, CERT) has to examine and
approve the crypto product. \[Note: this may have changed in light of
the  decrees mentioned below, but I have no specific recent information
on the import controls.\]\
I have no information about export restrictions in Tunisia.

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**  \
Telecommunication service providers need authorisation if they want to
use encryption, and they have to deposit keys with the government,
according to Decree No. 1997-501 of 14 March 1997 (Official Journal of
the Tunisian Republic, 25 September 1997). \[Source: 2000 [EPIC
survey](http://www2.epic.org/reports/crypto2000/)\] A September 1997
Order on crypto use in value-added telecoms services requires users and
service providers to apply for a license to use encryption, while
providing decryption keys. \[Source: 2005 HRW report [False
Freedom](http://hrw.org/reports/2005/mena1105/)\] 

A later decree, No. 2001-2727 of 20 November 2001, regulates the
\"conditions and procedures for the use of encryption means or services
through telecommunications networks, as well as the exercise of related
activities\" \[source: [August 2002 Telecoms Market Access
Study](http://mkaccdb.eu.int/study/studies/29.doc)\]. This decree builds
on the September 1997 Order, stipulating that encryption is now
supervised by the Ministry of Defense and an encryption commission,
while requests for a license are to be sent to the National Agency for
Electronic Certification (ANCE), \"including a detailed description of
the means of encryption and a manual explaining how to use and program
the encryption technology\" \[source: 2005 HRW report [False
Freedom](http://hrw.org/reports/2005/mena1105/)\]. 

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Turkey]{#tu} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 1, 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
[Wassenaar](#co) controls (pre-December 1998), including the General
Software Note.

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
Source \[1\] did not find domestic regulations, but other reports
suggest there may be restrictions.

**3. Developments in cryptography regulation**\
Source \[1\] did not find Developments in cryptography regulation.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Ukraine]{#ukr} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**1. Export/ import**\
Ukraine has signed the [Wassenaar](#Wassenaar) Arrangement. Export and
import are subject to licensing, according to the [ *Law On Licensing
Certain Types of Economic Activity* of 1 June 2000. Licenses are issued
by the Department of Special Telecommunication Systems and Protection of
Information of the Security Service of Ukraine (SBU). (]{lang="EN-US"
style="font-size: 12.0pt; font-family: Times New Roman"}[Source:
[presentation](http://www.rulg.com/documents/Legal_Considerations.doc)
(Word) by Russian-Ukrainian Legal Group.)]{lang="EN-US"
style="font-family: Times New Roman"}

**2. Domestic laws and regulations\
Production, trade and use of cryptography are** subject to licensing,
according to the [ *Law On Licensing Certain Types of Economic Activity*
of 1 June 2000. Licenses are issued by the Department of Special
Telecommunication Systems and Protection of Information of the Security
Service of Ukraine (SBU). A joint order, No. 88/66, of the State
Committee for Regulatory Policy and Entrepreneurship and the SBU's
Telecom Department regulates the use of encryption and contains an
application form to request a license. (]{lang="EN-US"
style="font-size: 12.0pt; font-family: Times New Roman"}[Source:
[presentation](http://www.rulg.com/documents/Legal_Considerations.doc)
(Word) by Russian-Ukrainian Legal Group.)]{lang="EN-US"
style="font-family: Times New Roman"}

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [United Kingdom]{#uk} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 1, 3, 4, 5, 8\]

[**1. Export/ import controls**\
Export is controlled in accordance with the EU]{#uk_Export} [dual-use
regulation](#eu_exp) and the [Wassenaar](#Wassenaar) Arrangement in *The
Dual-Use Items (Export Control) Regulations 2000* ([SI
2000/2620](http://www.hmso.gov.uk/si/si2000/20002620.htm)), amended
several times (see DTI\'s [legislation
page](http://www.dti.gov.uk/export.control/legislation.htm), in
particular the
[DUEC](http://www.dti.gov.uk/export.control/legislation/duec.htm) page).
This includes export of crypto software to other EU Member States.
Crypto export by intangible means (i.e., over the Internet) is now also
covered by the regulation (contrary to earlier regulations).

There is a personal-use and Community-Licence exemption through the
[Open General Export
License](http://www.dti.gov.uk/export.control/pdfs/ogels/cdev.pdf) of 1
May 2004, for crypto goods. (This revoked the earlier OGEL of 28
September 2000.) This general license allows export of any controlled
item (except functionally cryptanalytic tools) to most countries for
personal use or for use by subsidiaries or collaborators in the course
of \"their own commercial cryptographic product development
activities\".

At the [OECD meeting](#oecd) of December 1995, Nigel Hickson of DTI
stated that export controls for approved products should be lifted. The
policy [Paper on regulatory intent concerning use of encryption on
public networks](http://www.coi.gov.uk/coi/depts/GTI/coi9303b.ok) of
June 1996 announces that export controls will remain in place, but that
the government would try to simplify export controls for encryption
products used by licensed TTP\'s. This announcement was repeated in the
[Consultation Paper](http://dtiinfo1.dti.gov.uk/pubs/) of 19 March 1997
on *Licensing of Trusted Third Parties for the Provision of Encryption
Services.* In the April 1998 [policy announcement](#uk_announce), DTI
commits itself to working internationally on the \"updating and
streamlining\" of export controls, and this is repeated in the March
1999 [consultation
document](http://www.dti.gov.uk/CII/elec/elec_com.html).

The House of Commons Trade and Industry Select Committee, in its
[report](http://www.parliament.the-stationery-office.co.uk/pa/cm199899/cmselect/cmtrdind/187/18702.htm)
of 18 May 1999 on this consultation document, recommended \"that the
Government consider the case for a review of the rationale for the
continuation of export controls on cryptographic products, in the light
of their widespread availability, and the procedures by which such
controls are implemented.\"

The 1996 House of Lords [Agenda for
Action](http://www.parliament.the-stationery-office.co.uk/pa/ld199596/ldselect/inforsoc/inforsoc.htm)
(at 6.39) wants the government to join other EU states in putting
pressure on the US government to relax its export controls. [\
In July 1998, DTI released a White Paper on]{#uk_Domestic} [*Strategic
Export Controls*](http://www.dti.gov.uk/export.control/stratex/), which
at 3.2 proposes to extend the controls on exporting crypto software to
intangible transfers. Under such a policy, also exports by fax and email
should fall under the export controls.

See also section 5.5 of Simo-Pekka Parviainen\'s
[thesis](http://ethesis.helsinki.fi/julkaisut/oik/julki/pg/parviainen/).

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**

**Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000**[\
On 28 July 2000]{#uk_ripa}, the [Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act
2000](http://www.legislation.hmso.gov.uk/acts/acts2000/20000023.htm)
(2000 Chapter 23) received Royal Assent. Part III of the RIPA contains a
power to order disclosure in cases of encrypted data. Part III entered
into force on 1 October 2007, after a lengthy process to establish the
Code of Practice (see below). 

The power can be given:

-   if an intelligence service, the police, or the customs and excise
    have lawfully obtained encrypted data (art. 49 (1)), and
-   if decryption is necessary in the interest of national security,
    crime prevention or detection, or the UK\'s economic well-being, or
    if it is necessary for the effective exercise or proper performance
    of a statutory power or duty, and if requiring decryption is
    proportionate and the only reasonably practicable means (art. 49 (2)
    and (3)), and
-   if the person addressed is believed to be in possession of the
    decryption key (art. 49 (2)(a));
-   in principle, by requiring the person to decrypt himself (art. 50
    (1)), or, in special circumstances, by requiring the person to
    provide the decryption key (art. 50 (3)(c) jo. art. 51) - but not a
    key that is only used as an electronic-signature key (art. 49 (9));
-   special cases apply for people working in corporate bodies or firms
    (art. 49 (5-6)), and for cases where multiple keys can be used to
    decrypt (art. 50 (4-7)); if the person required to decrypt no longer
    has the key, he must disclose all information that he does have to
    facilitate retrieval of the key (art. 50 (8-9)).

A person who knowingly fails to comply with the order is punishable with
up to two years\' imprisonment (art. 53 (1) and (5)). The provision on
evidence and burden of proof in this penalisation are particularly
complex. Someone is supposed to have the key if the prosecution shows
that he had it at any time in the past, unless the suspect shows he no
longer possesses it. The suspect can show this by raising an issue with
respect to his ability to decrypt, but he also succeeds in exonerating
himself if his ability to decrypt is not proved beyond a reasonable
doubt (art. 53 (3)). The latter provision would suggest that there is no
burden-of-proof reversal, but the earlier provision (that former
possession of the key is sufficient evidence for current ability to
decrypt) carries the impression of a burden-of-proof reversal. The Home
Office, however, demystified that there is no reversal of the burden of
proof.\
If the suspects complies too late, he can put up a defence that he
decrypted as soon as it was reasonably practicable to do so (art. 53
(4)).

Part III furthermore contains provisions on tipping-off (violation of a
duty to keep secret is punishable with up to five years\' imprisonment)
(art. 54), safeguards that the officials who order disclosure must take
into account (art. 55), and definitions (art. 56).

On 10 July 2000, a Preliminary *Draft Code of Practice* *on
Investigation of electronic data protected by encryption etc* was
published, to provide guidance for public authorities on use of the
decryption powers. In 2006, the Home Office held a
[consultation](http://www.homeoffice.gov.uk/documents/cons-2006-ripa-part3/)
on a *Draft Code of Practice for the Investigation of Protected
Electronic Information* covered by Part III of RIPA. The consultation
closed on 13 September 2006.\
Parliament approved a revised [Code of
Practice](http://security.homeoffice.gov.uk/ripa/publication-search/ripa-cop/electronic-information),
which came into force on 1 October 2007.

[A section 49 decryption order is given regularly in practice, in cases
involving for example child indecency, terrorism, insider dealing,
theft, and evasion of excise duty. Data are provided by
the]{#uk-case-law} [Chief Surveillance
Commissioner](http://www.surveillancecommissioners.gov.uk/how_chief_comm.html)\'s
Annual Reports (note that in the following, data from one period may
include cases from a previous period, so the numbers do not add up
precisely for each period). In the period [April 2008 - March
2009](http://www.surveillancecommissioners.gov.uk/docs1/osc_annual_rpt_2008_09.pdf),
the National Technical Assistance Centre (NTAC) declined one application
for a decryption order and approved 26 applications. 17 of these were
forwarded for court approval, which was granted, leading to 15
decryption orders being given. 11 individuals failed to comply with the
order. Seven of them were charged, and two convicted, under the Act.
Between [April 2009 - March
2010](http://www.surveillancecommissioners.gov.uk/docs1/annualreport20092010.pdf),
38 orders were approved by NTAC, 22 received court permission, 17 were
served, of which six were complied with and seven were not complied with
(the others were pending). Five non-compliers were charged under the
Act, leading to one conviction, in a case involving child pornography;
the other cases were pending at the time of the report. Unfortunately,
the reports provide no information about the penalty for the convictions
of failing to comply with the decryption order. Between [April
2010-March
2011](http://surveillancecommissioners.independent.gov.uk/docs1/OSC%20Annual%20Report%202010-11.pdf),
26 out of 30 orders were approved by NTAC, 17 received court permission,
12 were served; 4 orders were complied with, 2 were not complied with; 3
non-compliers were prosecuted, and 1 person was convicted. [Between
April 2011-March
2012](http://surveillancecommissioners.independent.gov.uk/docs1/OSC-annual-report-2011-12.pdf),
all 57 requested orders were approved by NTAC, 33 received court
permission (the report does not say what happened to the other 21 for
which court permission was sought), 20 were served; 9 orders were
complied with, 15 were not complied with; 9 non-compliers were
prosecuted, and 2 persons were convicted.\
The punishments meted out in cases where people were convicted for not
complying with the decryption order, are not mentioned in the
Surveillance Commissioner\'s reports. News reports suggest that in one
terrorism case, someone was convicted to 9 months\' imprisonment ('UK
jails schizophrenic for refusal to decrypt files', [The
Register](http://www.theregister.co.uk/2009/11/24/ripa_jfl/) 24 November
2009), while in a child-pornography case, a sentence was given of 16
weeks ('Teen jailed over failure to hand over computer password',
[Out-law.com](http://www.out-law.com/page-11424) 6 October 2010). 

In [*R.* v *S and
A*](http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWCA/Crim/2008/2177.html){target="_blank"},
\[2008\] EWCA Crim 2177 (9 October 2008), the Court of Appeal ruled that
an order to deliver encryption keys under art. 53 RIPA did not violate
the privilege against self-incrimination. The lower court had argued
that an encryption key does not fall under the privilege, as it exists
independently from the suspect\'s will (refering to the ECtHR case of
*Saunders*), or that if it did, it was legitimate and proportionate. The
Court of Appeal noted that, even if the key exists independently of the
will, it nevertheless may fall under the privilege against
self-incrimination in that \"the fact of the appellants\' *knowledge* of
the keys may itself become an incriminating fact\" (§21), but only if
the encrypted material is, indeed, incriminating (§24). Given RIPA\'s
purpose, safeguards, and limitations, together with the fact that the
trial judge can always exclude evidence like the defendant\'s
incriminatory knowledge of the key, the Court of Appeal concludes that
the privilege has not been violated in this case.

For more information, see the Home Office\'s [RIPA information
page](http://security.homeoffice.gov.uk/ripa/about-ripa/) as well as the
[RIP Information Center](http://www.fipr.org/rip/) by the Foundation for
Information Policy Research. Cf. a BBC
[story](http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/technology/7102180.stm) on a November
2007 application of the decryption order.  

**Electronic Communications Act 2000**[\
Section 14]{#uk_eca2000} of the [Electronic Communications Act
2000](http://www.legislation.hmso.gov.uk/acts/acts2000/20000007.htm)
(2000 Chapter c.7), which received Royal Assent on 25 May 2000, is
entitled \"prohibition of key escrow requirements\". It determines that
nothing in the Act shall confer any power on the government to \"impose
a requirement on any person to deposit a key for electronic data with
another person.\" Subsection 2 contains two arcanely worded exceptions
to this: requirements may be made to deposit a key with the intended
recipient of data, and key recovery may be required for records \"kept
in pursuance of any provision made by or under any enactment or
subordinate legislation\".

The Electronic Communications Act also contained provisions for
registration and requirements of cryptography service providers, in
Chapter c.7, part I, but these never entered into force and were
consequently repealed on 25 May 2005 due to the sunset clause of art.
16(4) of Chapter c.7. []{#99ecbill}

**History**

**1999 Electronic Communications Bill**\
On 23 July 1999, the government published a [draft Electronic
Communications Bill](http://www.dti.gov.uk/cii/elec/ecbill_1.html),
together with a new consultation document \"[Promoting Electronic
Commerce](http://www.dti.gov.uk/cii/elec/ecbill_2.html). Consultation on
Draft Legislation and the Government\'s Response to the Trade and
Industry Committee\'s Report\", which also contained the Explanatory
Notes to the draft Bill.

Article 10 of the draft bill contained a power to require disclosure of
a crypto key. For encrypted material lawfully obtained, a written notice
can be given to a person who appears to be in the possession of the key,
to provide the encrypted information in intelligible form (that is, in
the condition in which it was before any encryption or similar process
was applied to it), or, if the notice explicitly orders so, to disclose
the key. A notice cannot require disclosure of keys intended only for
authentication that have not in fact been used for other (i.e.,
confidentiality) purposes. The notice needs to be authorized by the
appropriate authority (depending on the powers under which the encrypted
material was obtained), such as the Secretary of State, a judge, or a
senior police officer.\
Failing to comply with such a notice is an offence punishable with up to
two years\' imprisonment. It is a defence to show that you do not have
the key, if you give sufficient information to enable possession of the
key; likewise, it is a defence to show that it is not reasonably
practicable to disclose the key, if you show that you provided it as
soons as this was reasonably practicable.

If the notice to provide a key requires secrecy of the giving of the
notice, of its contents and of the things done in pursuance of it,
tipping off someone about this is punishable with up to five years\'
imprisonment (with several defences, such as informing a legal adviser).
Various safeguards were proposed to limit the use of the keys obtained
through a notice. A Code of practice will be issued about the exercise
of this power, and a Commissioner will be appointed to oversee the use
of this power.\
The government also decided to establish a Technical Assistance Centre,
which helps law enforcement, among others, in gaining access to
decryption keys under proper authorization.\
Although key escrow was not contained in the draft bill, concerns were
raised that a key-escrow requirement might feature in secondary
legislation, as a condition for approval as a Registered Cryptography
Service Provider. Eventually, a provision to prevent this was included
in section 14 of the Act (see above).

Because of the many critical reactions to the crypto proposals, the
decryption power provisions were lifted from the Electronic
Communications Bill in November 1999, in order to be reinserted in the
Regulation of investigatory Powers Bill.

2000 [Regulation of investigatory Powers Bill]{#uk_rip}\
On 9 February 2000, the draft [Regulation of investigatory
Powers](http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm199900/cmbills/064/2000064.htm)
Bill was presented to the House of Commons. Part III contains the
decryption-power provisions that were lifted out of the draft Electronic
Communications Bill (see above), with a few modifications. The new
proposal adds proportionality and goal requirements (required to comply
with the European Convention on Human Rights), stating that the
decryption command must be necessary for national security, crime
prevention or detection, or for the UK\'s economic well-being, or must
be likely to be of value for the exercise of a statutory power.

The penalisation of not complying with the decryption order is extended
with the requirement that a person is guilty only if he has or has had
possession of the decryption key. (As I read it, this means that the
burden of proof lies with the Prosecutor to show that the addressee (at
one time) possessed the key, while (presumably after this has been
argued) the burden of proof to show inability to decrypt lies with the
addressee.) The tipping-off offence is limited by adding that the police
can only require secrecy if the police obtained the encrypted material
at stake through a means that it is reasonable for law-enforcement to
keep secret.

[]{#uk_restrict}

**3. Developments in cryptography regulation**

**DTI 1996 paper**\
In June 1996, DTI announced a crypto policy in the [Paper on regulatory
intent concerning use of encryption on public
networks](http://www.coi.gov.uk/coi/depts/GTI/coi9303b.ok). According to
this paper, the government intends to introduce legislation for
licensing and regulating Trusted Third Parties (TTPs). These licensed
TTPs would be required to release to the authorities the private
encryption keys of clients under similar safeguards to those which
already exist. The licensing policy would aim to preserve
law-enforcement access, and so willingness to cooperate with law
enforcement would likely be a requirement for TTPs to be licensed. The
paper was welcomed by the House of Lords in its [Agenda for
Action](http://www.parliament.the-stationery-office.co.uk/pa/ld199596/ldselect/inforsoc/inforsoc.htm)
(at 6.38).

The policy paper statement that the Government does not intend to
regulate the private use of encryption (but rather corporate use) seemed
to be contradicted at a 27 June 1996 meeting discussing the policy. The
Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) confirmed at the meeting that
escrowing of confidentiality keys would be mandatory. Fortune 500
companies, however, would be trusted to manage their own keys, because
their concerns are supposed to be too high to risk not cooperating with
law enforcement anyway.

This policy was already indicated at the [OECD meeting](#oecd) of
December 1995, where the UK delegation said it approved a voluntary
(private) Trusted Third Party scheme with judicial access to stored keys
under a judicial warrant. The TTP\'s would probably need licenses to be
able to provide digital signature services. It was realized that
numerous questions, such as liability, remained yet unresolved.

**Red Pike**\
A preview of the proposed key escrow legislation was also found in the
proposal for the National Health Service to adopt a crypto system, Red
Pike, with a key recovery scheme. The 1996 (?) booklet \'The use of
encryption and related services with the NHSnet\' was quoted by Julian
Assange as: \"HMG had, for a number of years, been developing its ideas
for a national Public Key Management Infrastructure having what is known
as Key Recovery (KR) facilities. HMG\'s interest in Key Recovery is
driven by its Law Enforcement needs. (\...) It is expected that eventual
national policy in these areas, supported by legislation, will involve
the use of KR capabilities\".

[**Labour policy**]{#uk_Labour}\
In its 1995-1996 policy on the information superhighway, *Communicating
Britain\'s Future*, Labour stated it did not approve of escrowed
encryption: \"attempts to control the use of encryption technology are
wrong in principle, unworkable in practice, and damaging to the
long-term economic value of the information networks.\" Labour wished
authorities to have the power to demand decryption under judicial
warrant. It seemed, then, that Labour intended to penalize a refusal to
comply with a demand to decrypt under judicial warrant. (This might be
an extension of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, according to
which the power of seizure in certain cases includes the power to
require any information contained in a computer and accessible from the
premises to be produced in a form in which it can be taken away and in
which it is visible and legible.) In 1998, however, Labour\'s policy
document was removed from the World Wide Web, which could indicate that
Labour had changed its mind in favor of the DTI policy (see below). 

On 18 February 1998, the Annual General Meeting fo Scientists for Labour
passed a [resolution endorsing the Labour encryption
policy](http://www.liberty.org.uk/cacib/media/press-releases/sfl-agm.html)
of *Communicating Britain\'s Future* in reaction to rumours that the
Labour government would back away from this and announce a restrictive
policy in line with the DTI consultation paper.

[**1997-1998 DTI consultation process**]{#uk_consultation}\
The Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) launched a [Consultation
Paper](http://dtiinfo1.dti.gov.uk/pubs/) on *Licensing of Trusted Third
Parties for the Provision of Encryption Services* on 19 March 1997 for a
two-month comment period. The paper follows the June 1996 paper on
regulatory intent ([see below](#UK_1996_%20paper)), extending it from
use of encryption on public networks to encryption use in general
(including stored data). The general aim of the legislation would be to
engender trust in TTP services. The (processing of the) consultation
process took a long time; the resulting policy was announced in April
1998 ([see below](#uk_announce)).

The proposed legislation would regulate the licensing by DTI of Trusted
Third Parties (TTPs) that offer cryptographic services - Certification
Authorities, Key Escrow Agencies, and other TTPs. All cryptographic
services offered (by organizations, not by individuals) to the public
and business fall under the regime (except for intra-company TTPs and
except for encryption services which are an integral part of another
service, such as pay-TV). Services offered from abroad also require a
license, including services via the Internet (this would require TTPs
that offer online crypto services available in the UK either to get a
license or to take measures to not render the service to UK citizens,
e.g., by including an exception in the advertisement). The offering of
services without a license will be prohibited.

TTPs would be required to render escrowed private encryption keys under
a lawful warrant issued by the Secretary of State, under safeguards
broadly similar to current wiretap warrants. Only confidentiality keys
have to be handed over, not signature keys (although the paper does not
say how to distinguish between (dual-use) keys). Note that the paper
involves key escrow (not key recovery by sending along accessible
session keys), and that law enforcement would receive the private
encryption key, not session keys; no explicit safeguards are mentioned
to assure the agency will destroy the private key on expiry of the
warrant. For legal access to keys stored with TTPs abroad, there will
have to be agreements with other countries on the basis of dual
legality. TTPs will be liable for the protection of the private keys,
and there will be strict liability for TTPs for compromise or disclosure
of private keys. The requirement for releasing private keys upon a
lawful warrant only addresses licensed TTPs who are able to comply,
i.e., Key Escrow Agencies, not Certification Authorities (CAs).

The paper confirmed that use of licensed TTPs is voluntary, and that
there would be no restrictions on the use of cryptography. However,
since users need CAs, and CAs fall under the licensing regime, it was
not clear to what extent the government would allow a Public Key
Infrastructure to be set up without requiring escrowing of private keys.
If the licensing of CAs was restricted, there might be an effective
regulation of encryption use after all. Moreover, the \"Government
recognises that further legislation may be required in the future to
enable the appropriate authorities to obtain private encryption keys
other than those held by licensed TTPs.\"

See a list with the [responses to the DTI discussion
paper](http://www.cs.ucl.ac.uk/staff/I.Brown/dti-responses.htm),
including Charles Lindsey\'s [critique of the consultation
paper](http://www.cs.man.ac.uk/~chl/dti.critique.html). See also Yaman
Akdeniz\' [page with more
background](http://www.leeds.ac.uk/law/pgs/yaman/ukpriva.htm) on the UK
policy and a [critique by Cyber-Rights and
Cyber-Liberties](http://www.leeds.ac.uk/law/pgs/yaman/ukdtirep.htm). The
[Summary of Responses](http://jya.com/uk-ecomm.htm) on the consultation
paper released by DTI in April 1998 showed that there were 260
responses, only a few of which approved the proposals without
qualifications. The general idea of licensing TTPs was welcomed, but
major concerns were raised over the mandatory nature of the licensing
process, the linking of licensing to lawful access to keys, the nature
of lawful access to keys as such, and the ineffectiveness of key escrow.

See also the general outline of British policy up to this point in
chapter 6 of Bowden & Akdeniz\' article [Cryptography and Democracy:
Dilemmas of Freedom](http://www.fipr.org/publications/cryptfree.pdf).

**1998 policy** **announcement\
**On 19 February 1998, a new policy announcement was expected to be made
at the London ICX conference to follow up the DTI paper and the
responses to it. It was expected to be largely similar to the DTI paper,
but to refrain from linking certification of digital signature keys to
mandatory deposits. However, the announcement was postponed. Nigel
Hickson of DTI stated at the ICX conference that the likely timetable is
a policy announcement \"soon\", consultation in the summer of 1998, and
legislation in the 1998/9 parliamentary session.

The [policy announcement](http://jya.com/uk-ecomm.htm) was finally made
on 27 April 1998 by Barbara Roche, Parliamentary Under Secretary of
State at DTI, together with the publication of a [Summary of
Responses](http://jya.com/uk-ecomm.htm) to the Consultation Paper. The
policy follows the discussion paper, with some major changes to meet
concerns raised in the consultation process. The licensing of TTP\'s
will be voluntary, and so, crypto service providers are free to seek or
refrain from licensing. There is also a better policy differentiation
between digital signatures and confidentiality encryption. Thus, the
policy distinguishes Certification Authorities from Key Recovery Agents.
Organizations providing confidentiality encryption services (such as key
recovery or key management services) are encouraged to seek licenses;
licensed service providers will be required to make recovery of keys
possible \"through suitable storage arrangements\", which indicates a
key-escrow rather than a key-recovery technology (on this terminology,
see my [key recovery page](recovery.htm)). Legislation will be enacted
to enable law-enforcement agencies to obtain a warrant for lawful access
to encryption keys (which does not include keys used solely for digital
signature purposes). The legislation to yield access to crypto keys will
apply both to (licensed and unlicensed) crypto service providers holding
keys and to crypto users. (The latter seems an implementation of the
initial [Labour policy intention](#uk_Labour) to demand decryption under
judicial warrant.)

These policy principles were reiterated in Barbara Roche\'s speech at
the International Commerce Exchange Conference of 19 October 1998. She
announced then a consultation document detailing the thinking outlined
in April. Among the details are the announcement that OFTEL will be the
licensing authority for cryptographic services. The policy would be
effected in an Electronic Commerce Bill \"as soon as parliamentary time
permits\".

**1999 consultation document**\
The [consultation
document](http://www.dti.gov.uk/CII/elec/elec_com.html) \"Building
Confidence in Electronic Commerce\" was published on 5 March 1999. It
built upon the earlier proposals, with some changes. Confidentiality
service providers are no longer obliged to provide key escrow or key
recovery, although they are encouraged to do so. Legislation focuses on
enabling the authorities to require plaintext or keys. Thus, the policy
has three key elements:

1.  Establish a power to require any person, upon service of a written
    notice, to produce plaintext or a decryption key (or password
    protecting a key). The ability to serve a written notice will be
    ancillary to powers for wiretapping or searching and seizing. This
    does not apply to encryption keys used solely for digital
    signatures. The power would apply to both providers and users, but
    it does not imply a requirement to store keys. According to the
    government, this power does not infringe the privilege against
    self-incrimination (but compare my [FAQ](casi-faq.htm) on this
    issue). The government is considering how these provisions will
    apply to Scotland and Northern Ireland, where different wiretap and
    search laws apply. Safeguards would be introduced to protect
    delivered keys, as well as oversight and complaint mechanisms. To
    ensure compliance, the government would make it an offence not to
    comply with the terms of a written notice without reasonable excuse.
    Moreover, \"tipping off\"\" someone about an authorisation to demand
    encryption would also be penalized.
2.  The use of key escrow and key recovery is encouraged. A TTP wanting
    to be licensed as a Key Recovery Agent must demonstrate that it can
    provide, electronically, key-recovery information to law enforcement
    when presented with the appropriate authority.
3.  The government will \"work with industry and other interested
    parties to find other ways of mitigating the effects\" of crypto use
    by criminals.

Comments on the consultation document could be submitted until 1 April
1999 (sic). A [summary](http://www.dti.gov.uk/cii/elec/conrep.htm) of
the 246 comments is available at DTI. The House of Commons Trade and
Industry Select Committee published a
[report](http://www.parliament.the-stationery-office.co.uk/pa/cm199899/cmselect/cmtrdind/187/18702.htm)
on 18 May 1999, stating, among others, their disappointment \"that the
Government should still hold a candle for key escrow and key recovery.\"

**1999-2000 EC and RIP Bills, RIPA 2000**\
For the subsequent legislative history of the decryption power in the
RIPA 2000, see under 2.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [United States of America]{#us} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 1, 2, 4, 5, 7\]

[]{#us_1}

### 1. Export/ import controls

**Import**\
There are no import restrictions on cryptography.

**Export**\
The US has signed the [Wassenaar](#Wassenaar) Arrangement, but does not
implement the (pre-December 1998) General Software Note and generally
maintains stricter controls.

[**Export Administration Regulations (EAR)**\
Cryptography export used to be controlled by the International Traffic
in Arms Regulation (]{#ear}[ITAR](#itar)). At the end of 1996,
cryptography export was transferred to the [Export Administration
Regulations](http://www.access.gpo.gov/bis/ear/ear_data.html) (EAR) of
the Department of Commerce, 15 C.F.R. Parts 730-774 (see in particular
sections 740.13, 740.17 and 742.15). The export policy was relaxed to
favor export of data-recovery cryptography. This initiative was
announced in a [statement by the Vice
President](http://www.epic.org/crypto/key_escrow/clipper4_statement.html)
of 1 October 1996, and further elaborated in a November 15, 1996
executive order and memorandum, and in the Commerce Department draft EAR
of December 30, 1996. The Department of Justice is now included in
crypto export decisions. (Incidentally, the Commerce Department has
\"borrowed\" three export control and crypto specialists from the FBI
and NSA to help process license applications.)

Making available cryptography on the Internet or a BBS is considered
export, unless appropriate measures are taken to prevent foreigners from
accessing the cryptography.

The export rules distinguish between five categories of \"encryption
items\" (EI).

1.  Certain *mass-market* encryption software may be released from EI
    controls after a one-time review.
2.  *\"Data recovery\"* crypto (meaning that government can access keys
    or plaintext with a lawful warrant) will be eligible for an export
    license to non-embargoed countries. The procedures for data-recovery
    licenses were simplified in September 1998, when also \"recoverable
    products\" were released for export (a recoverable product means
    that an operator can access plaintext without the user noticing).
3.  After a one-time review, (up to) *56-bit cryptography* can be
    granted a six-month export license, provided the exporting business
    commits itself to incorporating a data recovery feature in its
    products within the next two years. This provision was changed in
    December 1998, when all 56-bit crypto was released for export after
    a one-time review, with no requirement of data recovery.
4.  All *other* encryption items may be eligible for encryption
    licensing arrangements; items not authorized under a licensing
    arrangement will be considered on a case-by-case basis.
5.  Encryption *\"technology\"* may be licensed for export on a
    case-by-case basis.

[In August 1997]{#draft-ei}, a 25 July interagency [draft Encryption
Items Rule](http://jya.com/bxa-ei-rule.htm) modifying the EAR was
published on the Internet, although the Department of Commerce declined
to check its authenticity. It would implement the government\'s key
recovery policy, and clarify several issues, e.g., that electronic
export to Canada is not controlled, the personal-use exemption (see
below), that support documentation is not required for exports of
technology or software (and removing this requirement for export to most
Eastern European countries), and that export of non-key recovery
financial-specific cryptography is allowed if it can by design only be
used for financial applications. The regulation would also require Web
server operators that allow people to download encryption software to
seek an advisory opinion from the Bureau of Export Affairs. See also an
[article](http://jya.com/bxa-nyt.htm) by Peter Wayner on the draft.

The [Bureau of Export]{#bxa-comments} Administration (BXA) (now: Bureau
of Industry and Security, BIS) has reviewed the export controls to
determine whether they should be modified, rescinded or extended. On 8
October 1997, it released a [statement](http://jya.com/bxa100897.txt)
\"seeking comments on how existing foreign policy-based export controls
have affected exporters and the general public.\" On 15 January 1998, it
published an [interim rule](http://bxa.fedworld.gov/bxainfo.html#wass)
revising the Commerce Control List, necessary to implement the
(pre-December 1998) [Wassenaar Arrangement](#co). The interim rule also
imposed new reporting requirements on persons that export certain items
to non-Wassenaar countries.

Two major reviews of the export controls were announced in July and in
September 1998 by BXA. The 7 July announcement, which was implemented in
an [interim rule](http://jya.com/bxa092298.txt) of 22 September 1998,
introduced a licensing policy for **banks and financial institutions**
(notably, brokers, credit-card companies, and securities firms).
Non-voice crypto products can be exported by banks and financial
institutions after a one-time review, with no data-recovery requirement,
to 45 countries (members of the Financial Action Task Force or countries
that have money-laundering laws) (Anguilla, Antigua, Argentina, Aruba,
Australia, Austria, the Bahamas, Belgium, Barbados, Brazil, Canada,
Croatia, Denmark, Dominica, Ecuador, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Hong Kong , Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Luxembourg,
Monaco, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, St.
Vincent and the Grenadines, St. Kitts and Nevis, Seychelles, Singapore,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, the UK, the US,
and Uruguay). To other countries, their export-license applications will
be viewed with a \"presumption of approval\".

On 16 September 1998, a major relaxation of export controls was
announced, which was implemented in a 31 December 1998 [interim
rule](http://jya.com/bxa123198.txt). This entailed the following.

-   All crypto products of up-to **56 bits** are released for export
    after a one-time review, except to the (currently seven as defined
    by the US) [terrorist countries](#us_terror). This includes DES,
    56-bit RC-2/4/5, 56-bit CAST. Also, asymmetric crypto of up to 1024
    bits is released for export. For export to military or government
    end-users, semi-annual post-facto reporting is required.
-   Export to **subsidiaries** of US companies is permitted (except to
    those located in the seven terrorist countries) under license
    exception. For export to strategic partners, \"favorable treatment\"
    under license will be extended.
-   Export to **health, medical, and insurance** companies (in the
    strict sense) is permitted to the same 45 countries as export by
    banks and financial institutions is allowed (see above). Biochemical
    and pharmaceutical producers excluded from this permission.
-   Export to **online merchants** is allowed, under license exception,
    for \"export of client-server applicaitons (e.g., SSL) and
    applications tailored to on-line transactions\" to online merchants
    located in the 45 countries of the bank list (see above). The export
    is \"limited to those that facilitate secure electronic transactions
    between merchants and their customers.\" Export to other countries
    receive a policy of approval under export licensing arrangements.
-   \"**Recoverable** products\" (which allow recovery of the plaintext
    without assistance or knowledge of the end user) can be exported to
    foreign commercial firms for internal company proprietary use only,
    located in most of the 45 countries listed above, with a semi-annual
    post-export reporting requirement of end users.
-   For exporting **key-recovery** products, the review of foreign
    key-recovery agents is eliminated.

[After the President\'s Export Council Subcommittee]{#us_exp9909} on
Encryption advised in \"[Liberalization
2000](http://cryptome.org/LIB42.htm)\" to ease the export controls, the
goverment
[announced](http://www.pub.whitehouse.gov/uri-res/I2R?urn:pdi://oma.eop.gov.us/1999/9/16/15.text.1)
further relaxation of export controls on 16 September 1999. (At the same
time as this announcement, the goverment announced the Cyberspace
Electronic Security Act ([CESA](#us_cesa99)) 1999 to meet the perceived
effects of the export changes on law enforcement and national security.)
The changes were to be implemented by 15 December 1999, but were
subsequently postponed. The [new
regulations](http://www.epic.org/crypto/export_controls/regs_1_00.html)
were finally published on 12 January 2000 (the [press
release](http://204.193.246.62/public.nsf/docs/60D6B47456BB389F852568640078B6C0)
is less specific but much more readable). The major components of the
updated policy are the following.

-   Any crypto of any key length can be exported under a license
    exception, after a technical review, to non-government end users in
    any country except the seven [\"terrorist countries\"](#us_terror).
    Exports to governments can be approved under a license.
-   Retail crypto (i.e., crypto which does not require substantial
    support and is sold in tangible form through retail outlets, or
    which has been specifically designed for individual consumer use) of
    any key length can, after a technical review, be exported to any
    recipient in non-terrorist countries.
-   Unrestricted crypto source code (like most \"open source\" software)
    and publicly available commercial source code (like \"community
    source\" code) can be exported to any end-user under a license
    exception without a technical review. BXA (BIS) must be given a copy
    or the URL of the source code. All other source code can be exported
    under license exception after a technial review to any
    non-government end-user. One may not, however, knowlingly export
    source code to a terrorist country, although source code may be
    posted on the WWW for downloading without the poster having to check
    whether it is downloaded from a terrorist country.
-   Any crypto can be (re)exported to foreign subsidiaries of US firms
    without a technical review. Foreign nationals working in the US no
    longer require an export license to work for US firms on encryption.
-   The regulations implement the December 1998 [Wassenaar](#Wassenaar)
    changes (notably, export of 56-bits and 64-bits (for mass-market
    products) crypto to non-terrorist countries).
-   Post-export reporting is required for exporting certain products
    above 64 bits to non-US entities.

[Since 19 October 2000, a further liberalization of export controls is
effective, triggered by changes in the EU export regulations (see the
Federal Register Vol. 65, No. 203, pp. 62600-10]{#us_exp0007}). The
liberalization was announced on 17 July 2000. A license exception is
introduced for export of any crypto product to *any* end user (so, the
distinction between government and non-government end users is dropped)
in the 15 EU countries, Australia, Czech Republic, Hungary, Japan, New
Zealand, Norway, Poland, and Switzerland. Also, US exporters can ship
products immediately after filing a commodity classification request,
without waiting for the technical-review results or the previously used
30-day delay period.

[On 6 June 2002]{#us_exp_0206}, a further liberalization was published
([Federal
Register](http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname=2002_register&docid=fr06jn02-6.pdf)
Vol .67, No. 109, p. 38855). Mass-market crypto with key length
exceeding 64 bits can now be exported after a 30-day review by the
Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS) (without having to report after
export, and without national-security review). To EU countries and the 8
other countries (Australia, Czech Republic, Hungary, Japan, New Zealand,
Norway, Poland, Switzerland), mass-market crypto can be exported
immediately after the review request has been registered with BIS. \
Publicly available source code can be exported to most destinations
after notification. \
The rule also clarifies that no review or notification is required for
export to US companies and subsidiaries for internal company use; for
products with short-range wireless encryption; and for items with
limited encryption use. \
See the [fact
sheet](http://www.bis.doc.gov/Encryption/EncFactSheet6_17_02.html) of
the rule at BIS.

[On 9 December 2004]{#us_exp_0412}, BIS published a further
\'streamlining\' of export procedures. A uniform 30-day review period
was now implemented for most encryption items that need review.
Moreover, the \'license-free zone\' to which mass-market crypto can be
exported immediately after a review request has been registered, was
expanded with the new EU member states (effectively adding Cyprus,
Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Slovakia, and Slovenia).\
The word \'retail\', which caused confusion because it was used beside
\'mass-market\', was deleted from the regulations.
\'Publicly-available\' crypto software placed on the Internet under the
relevant notification procedures can be modified without additional
notification, provided it remains at the same URL. Finally, procedures
for beta-test software and procedures for increasing key lengths of
previously reviewed and authorized products have been simplified.\
See the [fact
sheet](http://www.bis.doc.gov/Encryption/EncFactSheet12_02_04.htm) of
the 9 December 2004 rule at BIS.

[]{#us_exp_1101}

On 7 January 2011, a minor amendment was made to the EAR ([Federal
Register](http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2011-01-07/pdf/2010-32803.pdf)
Vol. 76, No. 5, p. 1059). Publicly available mass-market encryption
object code software (with symmetric key length exceeding 64 bits), and
publicly available encryption object code of which the corresponding
source code falls under License Exception TSU (i.e., when the source
code is publicly available), are no longer subject to the EAR. The
amendment includes some minor specific revisions.

[Terrorist countries]{#us_terror}\
The \"terrorist countries\" are: Cuba, Iran, Iraq, Libya, North Korea,
Sudan, and Syria.

See [BIS\' Wassenaar](http://www.bis.doc.gov/Wassenaar/) and BIS\'
[encryption](http://www.bis.doc.gov/Encryption/Default.htm) page. See
also the encryption excerpts of [BXA\'s 1997 Annual
Report](http://jya.com/bxa97-encry.htm).

**Personal-use exemption**\
In February 1996, the ITAR rules were amended as regards personal use of
cryptography. Temporary export of products for personal use was exempted
from the need of a license, provided the exporter take normal
precautions to ensure the security of the product, including locking the
product in a hotel room or safe. The product must not be intended for
copying, demonstration, marketing, sale, re-export, or transfer of
ownership or control. In transit, the product must remain with the
exporter\'s accompanying baggage. The exporter must keep records of each
export for five years. Export to embargoed countries (e.g., Cuba, Libya,
Syria) is prohibited. Under the new EAR, the ITAR personal use exemption
is replaced by license exception TMP and BAG (see the
[EAR](http://www.access.gpo.gov/bis/ear/ear_data.html) at 15 CFR 740.4
and at 740.14 and the [original ITAR
version](http://jya.com/itar021696.txt)). The Department of Commerce
announced in February 1997 it would revise the new regulations to, among
others, clarify the personal use exemption for laptop computers.

**Export Administration Act**\
The Export Administration Act expired in August 1994, but it was
extended by Executive Order 12924 by the president with the authority
under the International Emergency Economic Powers Act ([50 USC
1701ff](http://cryptome.org/50usc-ch35.htm)). [The president most
recently extended the state of emergency in an]{#subcom}
[order](http://jya.com/eo081199.htm) of 10 August 1999. On 9 August
1999, Senators Gramm and Enzi published a [draft Export Administration
Act of 1999](http://www.senate.gov/~enzi/eaa.htm) to reauthorize the
EEA, which would maintain controls, except for items easily available
abroad.\
Michael Froomkin (in [It came from Planet
Clipper](http://www.law.miami.edu/~froomkin/articles/planet_clipper.htm#POSTSCRIPT))
argues that the government has no authority to steer industrial crypto
policy through export regulation, and that the subsequent orders to
extend the EAA can hardly be justified with a reference to a state of
emergency this long.

[**Export case law**]{#us_exp_cases}

-   In August 2001, two men were arrested and accused of attempting to
    illegally export encryption devices to China ([news
    report](http://ap.tbo.com/ap/breaking/MGAJ2GYKZQC.html)).
-   In February 2002, the Commerce Department fined a San Diego firm
    \$95,000 for illegally exporting 128-bit encryption software to
    South Korea ([news
    report](http://www.linuxsecurity.com/articles/government_article-4509.html)).

[**Export Council Subcommittee**]{#subcom}In April 1997, the
President\'s Export Council Subcommittee on Encryption was established
to advise the Secretary for Export Administration on the implementation
of crypto export policy; it consists of approximately 25 members from
the exporting community and government agencies.

**ITAR**\
The [International Traffic in Arms
Regulation](http://www.epic.org/privacy/crypto/export_controls/itar.txt)
(ITAR) restricted export of \"dual-use\" cryptography (that is,
cryptography that can serve both civilian and military purposes) by
placing it on the Munitions List. For (relatively strong) products that
can encipher information, an export license was usually issued only for
use by foreign branches of American enterprises and for use by financial
institutions. \"Weak\" cryptography (e.g., with a certain maximum
key-length) could also be exported.

Export of cryptography that served only authentication or integrity
purposes was already ruled by the Export Administration Regulations.
Some types of public-domain software were decontrolled and on the
Commerce Control List.

In 1995, the Administration proposed a mitigation of the export
controls. Cryptography using keys up to 64 bits (as opposed to the
current maximum of 40 bits) would be exportable, provided it implements
key-escrow. Criteria for exportable cryptography were discussed at two
meetings in September and December 1995; criteria for the escrow agents
were handed out at the December meeting.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

**Initiatives to relax export controls**\
Several initiatives, as yet unsuccessful, have been taken, both in
Congress and by the public, to try to mitigate the cryptography export
restrictions.

**Karn, Bernstein, and Junger cases**\
A federal district court in Washington, DC, on March 22, 1996 rejected
the claims of *Phil Karn*, stating that the case presented a political
question for the two elected branches to decide. It held that the export
restrictions did not violate the First Amendment. The defence appealed;
on 6 November 1996, the Department of Justice filed a [brief on
appeal](http://www.venable.com/oracle/oracle8.htm). On 21 January 1997,
the appeal court remanded the case to the district court in light of the
[transfer](#ear) of the export controls to the Department of Commerce;
it did not reach the constitutional issues. In August 1997, the
Department of Commerce ruled that certain programs Karn sought to export
were controlled by the EAR and subject to prior licensing. Karn
challenged this classification in a law suit against the DoC; in March
1998, the government moved to dismiss this law suit. On 18 February
1999, the D.C. District Court
[granted](http://people.qualcomm.com/karn/export/lbo_ruling.html)
Karn\'s request for discovery and an evidentiary hearing. However,
following the January 2000 [revisions](#us_exp9909) of the export
regulations, which effectively made publicly available source code
freely exportable, Karn allowed his case to be dismissed as moot. See
[more information](http://people.qualcomm.com/karn/export/index.html) on
this case.

Contrary to the 1996 Karn decision, a Northern California district
court, in a [December 18, 1996
decision](http://www.eff.org/pub/Legal/Cases/Bernstein_v_DoS/) in the
case of *Daniel Bernstein*, who seeked the ability to export his
encryption algorithm, judged the export regulations to be too
restrictive. The disctrict judge found the licensing system an
unconstitutional prior restraint on free speech - having ruled earlier
that crypto source code was protected by the First Amendment (see the
[decision of April 15,
1996](http://www.eff.org/pub/Legal/Cases/Bernstein_v_DoS/Legal/960415.decision),
in which she denied the government\'s motion to dismiss the case). The
judge called the licensing system a \"paradigm of standardless
discretion\", given its lack of decision time limits, of standards for
denial and of appeal provisions. The ruling does not relate to object
code. On December 30, 1996, Bernstein\'s lawyers asked the government to
delay enforcement of the new [export rules](#ear) until they are
reviewed for constitutionality.\
On 25 August 1997, the federal district court affirmed its earlier
decision, declaring that the Export Administration Regulations and all
rules promulgated thereunder insofar as they apply to cryptography are
in violation of the First Amendment on the grounds of prior restraint
and are, therefore, unconstitutional. The judge enjoined the government
from further enforcement of the regulations, including prosecution of
\"anyone who uses, discusses or publishes or seeks to use, discuss or
publish \[Bernstein\'s\] encryption program and related materials.\" The
government, on 28 August 1997, requested a stay of the Court\'s order
pending appeal, which was granted for the most part; Bernstein could,
however, publish his program on the Internet after 8 September. See the
[de cision of August 25,
1997](http://www.eff.org/pub/Legal/Cases/Bernstein_v_DoS/Legal/970825_decision.html).\
On [6 May
1999](http://www.eff.org/pub/Legal/Cases/Bernstein_v_DoS/Legal/19990506_circuit_decision.html),
the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit held (two to one) that the
EAR are an unconstitutional prior restraint on free speech in violation
of the First Amendment, arguing that source code is expressive speech
entitled to First Amendment protection. Judge Nelson dissented. The
government filed a
[motion](http://www.eff.org/pub/Legal/Cases/Bernstein_v_DoS/Legal/19990621_rehearing_motion.html)
for reconsideration on 21 June 1999, which was
[granted](http://www.mercurycenter.com/business/top/058160.htm) on 30
September. An 11-judge \"en banc\" panel of the Court was to re-examine
the case on 21 March 2000, but, as requested by Bernstein on 3 March,
the Court of Appeals on 12 April remanded the case back to the district
court for reconsideration in light of the January 2000
[revisions](#us_exp9909) of the export regulations. Eventually, however,
due to repeated assurances by the DoJ attorney Coppolino that the
government would not enforce several portions of the regulations, the
case was dismissed. So, in October 2003, Bernstein
[announced](http://cr.yp.to/export/2003/10.15-bernstein.txt) that the
case had come to an end (for now).\
See the [Bernstein archive](http://export.cr.yp.to).

In August 1996, law professor *Peter Junger* filed suit to challenge the
ITAR regulations, saying they restricted his ability to teach a
cryptography course, as foreign students are attending his classes; he
wants to publish his class materials on the WWW server. Following the
Bernstein decision (see above), Junger filed an amended complaint
against the EAR regulations. On 2 July 1998, in *[Junger v.
Daley](http://jya.com/pdj11.htm)* (N.D. Ohio, 1:96-CV-1723), the US
District Court for the Northern District Court of Ohio dismissed
Junger\'s claim, arguing that encryption source code is not sufficiently
expressive to merit First Amendment protection. Therefore, crypto export
is not protected conduct under the First Amendment, and export
regulation passes constitutional muster. On appeal, this decision was
reversed. In [Junger v.
Daley](http://pacer.ca6.uscourts.gov/cgi-bin/getopn.pl?OPINION=00a0117p.06),
2000 FED App. 0117P (6th Cir.) of 4 April 2000, the Court of Appeals for
the Sixth Circuit stated that computer source code merits First
Amendment protection, since it is a means of expression among
cryptographers: \"for individuals fluent in a computer programming
language, source code is the most efficient and precise means by which
to communicate ideas about cryptography\". Thus, the case was remanded
to the District Court to further consider the crypto export regulations
(as [revised](#us_exp9909) in January 2000) under the Constitution.

See various [documents](http://jya.com/pdj.htm) in this case, and
[another page](http://samsara.law.cwru.edu/comp_law/jvd/).

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

**Congress Bills**\
Three bills were proposed in 1996 to ease export controls. [Senator
Leahy\'s bill]{#leahy}, proposed on 5 March 1996, the [Encrypted
Communications Privacy
Act](http://www.eff.org/pub/Privacy/ITAR_export/Crypto_bills_1996/s1587_96.bill)
(S. 1587), reintroduced 27 February 1997 (S. 376), would, among others,
relax export controls, allowing generally available or public-domain
crypto to be exported. At the same time, Representative Goodlatte
introduced a similar bill, [Security And Freedom through Encryption
(SAFE)
Act](http://www.eff.org/pub/Privacy/ITAR_export/Crypto_bills_1996/hr3011_96.bill)
of 1996 (H.R. 3011), reintroduced on 12 February 1997 (H.R. 695). On 30
April 1997, the House Subcommittee on Courts and Intellectual Property
unanimously approved the SAFE bill. On 14 May 1997, the House Judiciary
Committee also unanimously approved the SAFE bill, after adopting three
amendments (one to the criminal provision (ensuring that it only
criminalizes crypto use with the intention to cover up a federal
felony), one to correct a technical oversight, and one to direct the
Attorney General to compile and maintain data on the instances in which
cryptography hampered the investigation). On 24 June 1997, the House
International Relations Subcommittee on International Economic Policy
and Trade approved the SAFE act. The House International Relations
Committee approved the bill on 22 July 1997, rejecting an amendment to
reinstate strict controls if relaxation would turn out to harm national
security. The House National Security Committee radically amended the
Bill to include the Secretary of Defense in export decisions
(Weldon/Dellums amendment), whereas the House Permanent Select Committee
on Intelligence replaced the language of the bill with domestic controls
(see below) as well as strengthening export controls (Goss/ Dicks
amendment). The House Commerce Committee, on 25 September 1997, rejected
an amendment by Oxley/Manton to strengthen export controls, and adopted
a version by Markey and White to remove export controls. Given the many
conflicting versions of the bill, the SAFE Act was not put to a vote,
especially since the chair of the House Rules Committee, Solomon, stated
to only move the Act to the floor if it contains (Oxley/Manton)
mandatory key escrow. (See [below](#safeprotect) on the re-introduced
bill.)

In May 1996, [Senator Burns]{#burns} launched a bill, [Promotion of
Commerce Online in the Digital Era (Pro-CODE) Act of
1996](http://www.eff.org/pub/Privacy/ITAR_export/Crypto_bills_1996/s1726_96.bill)
(S. 1726), reintroduced 27 February 1997 (S. 377). The bill would relax
export controls for generally available or mass-market cryptography. The
1997 bill would additionally establish an Information Security Board to
give law-enforcement agencies special access to the development of new
plans for privacy-enhancing technologies.

The Kerrey-McCain bill, Secure Public Networks Act ([see
below](#kerrey)), introduced June 1997, would allow export of 56-bit
non-key recovery cryptography under a license. Key recovery cryptography
would be exportable regardless of key length, under a license. An
inofficial draft amendment circulating in the government by August 1997
would somewhat relax the export provisions of the bill (export of crypto
with a recovery feature, regardless whether it is activated, would be
granted; an Advisory Board would recommend to the President whether
larger than 56-bit crypto could be decontrolled; and the power to
prohibit any exports \"contrary to US security interests\" would be
dropped). On 4 March 1998, the senators announced a new, largely
similar, version of their bill.

The [Computer Security Enhancement Act]{#CSEA} of 1997 (HR 1903) would
require the Commerce Department, upon request, to take into account the
foreign availability of comparable crypto in deciding the export of
crypto products. The Act was cleared in the House on 16 September 1997.

On 12 May 1998, senators Ashcroft and Leahy introduced the [E-PRIVACY
Act](http://www.epic.org/crypto/legislation/eprivacy.html) (\"Encryption
Protects the Rights of Individuals from Violation and Abuse in
Cyberspace\"). This would relax export controls, lifting the
restrictions for exporting generally available crypto products after a
one-time review by the Secretary of Commerce; this also valid for
products if a like product of similar strenght is commercially available
outside the US from a foreign supplier, which is to be determined by an
Encryption Export Advisory Board. The same holds for \"interface
mechanisms for interaction with other encryption products\" which do not
themselves provide encryption capabilities. For other crypto, an export
advisory board would make recommendations on its exportability.

On 25 February 1999, Rep. Goodlatte reintroduced the Security And
Freedom through Encryption Act (**SAFE**) (H.R. 850). The bill would
limit export license requirements for generally-available or
public-domain cryptography to a one-time, 15-day technical review.
Export would be allowed for more specialized products to the 45
countries on the \"financial export\" list (see [above](#us_bxa_9809))
or if a similar product is available abroad without export restrictions.
The SAFE Act was approved by the Commerce Committee on 23 June 1999
(with amendments) and by the International Relations Committee on 13
July 1999 (with amendments tightening certain provisions). The Permanent
Select Committee on Intelligence amended and approved the bill on 15
July; the amendments will be viewed as suggestions only, since the
Committee has no jurisdiction over the bill. The Armed Services
Committee substantially amended and approved the bill on 21 July 1999;
an amendment would permit the president, unsubjected to judicial review,
to block export if it is contrary to national-secyrity interests.
Subsequently, the bill went to the Rules Committee to reconcile the
competing versions into one that will be presented to the full House.

On 14 April 1999, Sen. McCain introduced the Promote Reliable On-Line
Transactions to Encourage Commerce and Trade (**PROTECT**) Act of 1999
(S. 798). This bill would allow unlimited crypto export to member states
of NATO, OECD, and ASEAN, and limit export to other countries to 64-bit
key-length crypto. An Encryption Export Advirosy Board would
periodically research foreign availability of cryptography and advise
amendments accordingly. The Bill passed the Commerce, Science, and
Transportation Committee on 23 June 1999.

On 9 August 1999, Senators Gramm and Enzi published a [draft Export
Administration Act of 1999](http://www.senate.gov/~enzi/eaa.htm) to
reauthorize the EEA, which would maintain controls, except for items
easily available abroad and mass-market items. On 27 July 1999, as an
alternative to the [SAFE](#safeprotect) Act, Rep. Goss introduced the
*Encryption for National Interests Act* (H.R. 2616), which would, among
others, remove key recovery as a factor in any export controls, and
allow exports of up to 64-bit symmetric crypto (level to be increased
every six months).

See for more information the [Pro-crypto Legislation
Archive](http://www.eff.org/pub/Privacy/ITAR_export/Crypto_bills_1996/).

On 5 September 1997, the [California]{#California} legislature passed a
resolution asking for a revision of federal crypto export controls,
supporting the proposed SAFE Act (the original version, see above).

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

**Reports**\
The Department of Commerce recommended easing export controls after a
joint
[study](http://www.epic.org/privacy/crypto/export_controls/commerce_study_summary.txt)
with the National Security Agency found that the export restrictions
harm US business.

In June 1996, the National Research Council released its long-awaited
[study on cryptography
policy](http://www.nap.edu/readingroom/books/crisis/). It recommended
that export controls be progressively relaxed, but not eliminated.
Products providing confidentiality at a level that meets most general
commercial requirements should be easily exportable; for today, this
would mean allowing export of 56-bit symmetric encryption products.
Export of stronger cryptography (i.e., today, using more than 56 bits)
should be exportable on an expedited basis to a list of approved
companies if the proposed user agrees to provide the US government
access to decoded information.

According to a draft paper [Enabling Privacy, Commerce, Security and
Public Safety in the
GII](http://www.epic.org/crypto/key_escrow/white_paper.html), the
government is working toward a policy that will readily license export
of key-escrow systems, once the needed infrastructure and
government-to-government agreements are in place.

**More information**\
See for more information and links the [Cryptography Export Control
Archives](ftp://ftp.cygnus.com/pub/export/export.html) and John Young\'s
[Arms Control Essays](http://jya.com/acda.htm).

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

### 2. Domestic laws and regulations

[**DMCA**\
The]{#us_wipo} [Digital Millennium Copyright
Act](http://thomas.loc.gov/cgi-bin/bdquery/z?d105:h.r.02281:) (Public
Law 105-304, H.R. 2281, also called WIPO Copyright Treaties
Implementation Act) was approved on 12 October 1998 by the House and
signed by the President on 29 October 1998. It creates penalties for
circumventing copyright-protection systems. Although limited exemptions
for circumventing such systems for the purposes of cryptography research
were included in the Act, cryptographers were still concerned that
crypto research and the development of cryptanalytic tools would be
hindered. (Compare EPIC\'s
[testimony](http://www.epic.org/privacy/copyright/epic-wipo-testimony-698.html).)
The *[Rulemaking](http://www.loc.gov/copyright/1201/anticirc.html) on
Exemptions from Prohibition on Circumvention of Technological Measures
that Control Access to Copyrighted Works* of the Copyright Office,
effective from 28 October 2000 until 28 October 2003, contains two
exemptions (related to filtering and malfunctioning software).\
Compare EFF\'s archive of [DMCA
cases](http://www.eff.org/IP/DMCA/#dirs).

[**Case law**]{#us_2_cases}\
In the case of [*United States* v
*Scarfo*](http://lawlibrary.rutgers.edu/fed/html/scarfo2.html-1.html),
the US District Court for the District of New Jersey held on 26 December
2001 that the federal wiretapping law and the Fourth Amendment allow the
use of a \"key logger\" that intercepts a passphrase to an encrypted
file, provided that the system does not operate while the computer is
communicating with other computers. Because of a plea agreement, there
will be no appeal in this case. See EPIC\'s [Scarfo
page](http://www.epic.org/crypto/scarfo.html).

In the case of *United States* v *Boucher* (2009 WL 424718 (D.Vt.)), the
District Court of Vermont found that an order to provide decrypted files
did not violate the privilege against self-incrimination. Boucher had
been stopped by Customs and had his laptop searched. Finding a file
named \"2yo getting raped during diaper change\" which could not be
opened, the customs agent asked Boucher to show all downloaded images on
the computer, upon which Boucher navigated to the \"Z\" drive which the
agent searched, finding what looked like child-porn files. The laptop
was seized, but afterwards the Z drive could not be accessed without a
password. Boucher was ordered by a grand jury subpoena to provide the
password. The Court held that in such circumstances, the Fifth Amendment
did not apply, since the act of producing the unencrypted files was not
testimonial on the basis of the \"foregone conclusion\" doctrine; it
would not reveal the \"existence or location\" of documents that were
unknown to the government (since the agent had seen relevant files on
the Z drive), nor would it authenticate the documents, since he had
already admitted to owning the laptop and shown files on the Z drive to
the agent. Therefore, the defendent must provide an unencrypted version
of the Z drive.\
The District Court overturned the opinion by the Magistrate Judge in the
lower court (2007 WL 4246473 (29 November 2007)), who had held that a
password that protects encrypted files falls under the Fifth Amendment
privilege, since it exists in the suspect\'s mind and handing it over
would provide testimonial evidence, in particular, the fact that the
suspect knows the password and has control over the encrypted files. Cf.
Susan Brenner\'s [blog
post](http://cyb3rcrim3.blogspot.com/2007/12/court-upholds-using-fifth-amendment-to.html)
on the magistrate ruling.

In *United States v Gavegnano*, 2009 WL 106370 (4th Cir. Jan. 16, 2009),
the Court also held that obtaining the password to encrypted files was a
\"foregone conclusion\". Gavegnano used a laptop provided to him by his
government employer, which was seized upon suspicion of child
pornography. When requested, he gave the password to the encrypted
computer, and he was convicted for child pornography found there. On
appeal, Gavegnano argued that his Fifth Amendment had been violated.
This appeal failed on the basis of the \"foregone conclusion\" doctrine
\"because the Government independently proved that Gavegnano was the
sole user and possessor of the computer\" and hence giving the password
was not testimonial.

In *United States v Kirschner*, 2010 WL 1257355 (E.D. Mich. Mar. 30,
2010), the defendant was ordered to appear before the grand jury and to
provide \"all passwords used or associated with the . . . computer . . .
and any files\" (rather a fishing expedition). In such a case, ordering
a decryption key or password is similar to revealing the combination to
a wall safe, which requires the defendant to communicate knowledge.
Following the precedent of *United States v. Hubbell*, 530 U.S. 27
,(2000), this is testimonial. Since the prosecution had only promised
immunity for the act of giving the password, but not for resulting
evidence, the order to give passwords violated the Fifth Amendment,
since also information that may lead to incriminating evidence is
privileged even if the information itself is not inculpatory.

In *United States v Fricosu* (D.CO. Jan. 23, 2012) (No.
10-CR-00509-REB), the defendant was ordered on the basis of the All
Writs Act to provide the decrypted contents of her laptop that was
seized in her bedroom, providing immunity for the act of decryption but
not for any resulting evidence. Since the circumstances of the case
provided sufficient evidence that the laptop belonged to Fricosu and
that she was able to access the decrypted contents, and the government
knew the existence and location of the computer\'s files, the privilege
against self-incrimination did not apply, and the court ordered Fricosu
to hand over an unencrypted version of the laptop\'s hard disk (with
immunity for the authenticating act of providing the data, so that the
government needs to prove the fact that Fricosu had access to the files
based on other evidence).

John Doe was suspected of spreading child pornography. Certain parts of
the seized laptops and external hard disks were inaccessible; Doe
refused to provide the unencrypted contents of the disks before a grand
jury, and was convicted for contempt of court. In appeal, the Court of
Appeals for the 11th Circuit acquitted Doe (*United States v John Doe*,
*In re Grand Jury Subpoena Duces Tecum* (11 Cir Feb. 23, 2012)). The
disks were encrypted with TrueCrypt (an encryption programme that aims
to provide [\'plausible
deniability\'](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deniable_encryption)), and
the forensic investigators were not able to convince the court that
there was actually anything hidden in the unreadable parts of the disks.
Thus, it has not been demonstrated \"that the Government knows whether
any files exist and are located on the hard drives\" and the \"foregone
conclusion\" doctrine does not apply. Since the decryption order only
provided immunity for the act of decryption but not for resulting
evidence, the Fifth Amendment was violated.

[]{#us_3}

### 3. Developments in cryptography regulation

[**Escrowed Encryption Standard (Clipper)**\
In 1993,]{#ees} the Clinton Administration announced the Escrowed
Encryption Initiative (EEI), usually referred to as the Clipper
Initiative, after its first implementation in the Clipper chip. A
classified, secret-key algorithm, SKIPJACK, has been implemented in an
Escrowed Encryption Standard (EES). The reported basic idea of the EEI
is to provide citizens with a safe cryptosysem for securing their
communications without threatening law enforcement. The EES procures law
enforcement access by means of a Law Enforcement Access Field (LEAF)
that is transmitted along with each encrypted message; the field
contains information identifying the chip used. Law enforcement agencies
wire-tapping communications encrypted with EES can decipher tapped
messages by obtaining the two parts of the chip\'s master key that are
deposited with two escrow agencies (National Institute of Standards and
Technology and the Treasury Department\'s Automated Systems Division),
provided they have a court order for the tapping.

Following criticisms on the choice of escrow agents, the government came
up with commercial key escrow (\"Clipper II\"), a scheme in which the
escrow agents can be independent organizations chosen by cryptography
users.

The EES is a voluntary standard to be used in telephone communications.
Privacy advocates fear that the government may declare escrowed
encryption obligatory once it has captured a sufficient portion of the
market. The EES has been generally rejected, though.

In March 1997, the Department of Defense announced that the NSA,
developer of the Fortezza card (implementing the key-escrow system of
the EES), would no longer implement the EES; instead, it would work to
adopt key recovery as promoted by the US government (see below).

**Key Management Infrastructure**\
In its May 1996 draft paper [\"Enabling Privacy, Commerce, Security and
Public Safety in the
GII\"](http://www.epic.org/crypto/key_escrow/white_paper.html)(referred
to by opponents as Clipper III), the government proposes the
establishment of a key management infrastructure (KMI) that incorporates
key escrow. Participation in the KMI would be voluntary, and choice of
encryption algorithms would be free. A Policy Approving Authority would
certify Certification Authorities (CAs); it would also be responsible
for setting CA performance criteria to meet law enforcement\'s needs.
Users should escrow keys with an Escrow Authority (either the CA or an
independent EA) before they can get a public-key certificate.
Self-escrow is considered an acceptable option, if the corporate CAs can
meet necessary performance requirements, including independence from the
rest of the organization and handing over keys to law enforcement.

On December 5-6, 1996, a [Technical Advisory
Committee](http://csrc.nist.gov/tacdfipsfkmi/) (website no longer
available) to Develop a Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS)
for the Federal KMI held its first meeting. A [report of the
meeting](http://jya.com/fipsmeet.htm) expressed doubt on the viability
of the process, due to the difference of opinion between business and
government on the need for a key-recovery standard. Various subsequent
meetings were held in 1997 and 1998. In mid-1998, the Committee
announced it could not reach an agreement on a final FIPS
recommendation. The charter of the TACDFIPSFKMI was renewed in August
1998 to conintue work on the requirements for key-recovery products. It
released a report on proposed key-recovery standards, for which comments
could be submitted until 4 November 1999 (website no longer available).

**[NRC report]{#us_4_nrc}**\
The June 1996 National Research Council study [Cryptography\'s role in
Securing the Information
Society](http://www.nap.edu/readingroom/books/crisis/), which was
requested by Congress, favors widespread encryption. It says the
government should promote widespread commercial use of cryptography. The
government can explore key escrow systems for its own use, but it should
not push others to use it; even if the current many unresolved questions
regarding key escrow were resolved, adoption of escrowed encryption (or
of any other standard) should be voluntary.

**Broad Encryption Policy**\
The 1 October 1996 [statement by the Vice
President](http://www.epic.org/crypto/key_escrow/clipper4_statement.html),
covering export controls, also refers to domestic crypto use. The
temporary relaxation of export controls is part of a broader encryption
policy, which claims to be broadly consistent with the [NRC
recommendations](#us_4_nrc). Domestic use of key-escrow cryptography
will be voluntary, and the choice of an encryption system remains free.
The government will, however, promote key-escrow cryptography by
expanding the purchase of key-escrow products for itself, promoting
key-escrow cryptography in international discussions, and stimulating
the development of innovative key-escrow products and services. The
Administration will also seek legislation to facilitate commercial
key-escrow, including liability issues for releasing keys.

**Crypto Ambassador**\
On November 15, 1996, the government appointed ambassador Aaron as
\"special envoy for cryptography\". He will promote international
cooperation and coordinate US contacts with foreign governments on
encryption matters. On 18 June 1997, the Electronic Privacy Information
Center (EPIC) filed a lawsuit to seek public disclosure of the travel
records of ambassador Aaron. EPIC acquired the travel records in January
1998.

**Annual report on criminal crypto use**\
A 2 October 1996 law (HR 3723) includes an amendment requiring the US
Sentencing Commission to report annually on the use of computer
encryption to conceal criminal activity. Likewise, by law S. 1769 signed
on 2 May 2000, section 2519(2) (b) (iv) of title 18 U.S.C. requires the
Department of Justice to generally report on law-enforcement encounters
with encrypted communications in the execution of wiretap orders. The
President\'s
[Statement](http://www.pub.whitehouse.gov/uri-res/I2R?urn:pdi://oma.eop.gov.us/2000/5/4/4.text.1)
specifies that only general aggregate data on the total number of crypto
encounters will be provided.

[]{#krdraft}

**Draft Key Recovery Legislation**\
At the end of March 1997, a [Draft Key Recovery
Legislation](http://www.cdt.org/crypto/970312_admin.html) dating from 12
March was published: the \"Electronic Data Security Act of 1997\". The
Act would promote a Public Key Infrastructure with key recovery by
registering (private or (foreign) government) Certification Authorities
(CAs) and (private or government) Key Recovery Agencies (KRAs). A
registered CA may only issue a public key certificate if the user
provides a registered KRA with sufficient information to allow timely
plaintext recovery by law-enforcement or national security. KRAs - both
registered and unregistered - shall disclose recovery information to
government agents with a warrant or upon receipt of a written
authorization by the Attorney General. After complaints that use of a
written authorization without judicial review could violate the Fourth
Amendment, in May 1997, the government amended the draft law to clarify
that the same legal criteria would apply for disclosing recovery
information as for wiretapping. The facts of release of recovery
information to government agencies may not be disclosed. Those who
intentionally undermine certain provision of the Act (such as issuing
public key certificates to persons while knowing they do have not
provided sufficient information to a KRA) are subject to civil
penalties; the penalties are limited for registered CAs and KRAs. Such
activities are also criminally punishable with up to five years\'
imprisonment. Likewise, the use of encryption in furtherance of the
commission of a criminal offense can be punished with six months\' to
five years\' imprisonment (having used key recovery which is reasonably
available to the government is an affirmative defense). People packaging
encryption products must label them to inform the user whether the
product uses registered KRAs. Finally, the President shall conduct
negotiations with other countries on the mutual recognition of
registered KRAs. The draft legislation affirms that use of any
encryption shall be lawful except as provided in the Act or other law
(which currently means any encryption use is lawful except in
furtherance of a crime), and that use of the key recovery infrastructure
is voluntary. The government is no longer seeking a sponsor for the
draft bill.

The government\'s [Framework for Global Electronic
Commerce](http://www.whitehouse.gov/WH/New/Commerce/) restates the
(voluntary) key recovery approach. [In a 4 March 1998 letter to Senatory
Daschle, Vice-President Gore reiterated the government\'s commitment to
encouraging voluntary key recovery; it reaffirmed that the
administration will not pursue mandatory key recovery. Rather, the
government will pursue a dialogue between industry and law
enforcement.]{#kerrey}

**Cyberspace Electronic Security Act of 1999**\
On 16 September 1999, together with the announcement of [export
relaxation](#us_exp9909), the goverment
[proposed](http://www.pub.whitehouse.gov/uri-res/I2R?urn:pdi://oma.eop.gov.us/1999/9/16/16.text.1)
a draft Cyberspace Electronic Security Act of 1999. This contains
provisions on law enforcement accessing crypto keys stored with third
parties, but there is no requirement for users to use key-recovery
crypto. The FBI\'s Technical Support Center will be given \$80 million
over four years, to help law enforcement \"in responding to the
increasing use of encryption by criminals\". Moreover, to ensure \"that
sensitive investigative techniques and industry trade secrets remain
useful\", there will be protections \"from unnecessary disclosure in
litigation and criminal trials involving encryption\", which indicates
that the prosecution should not have to detail how they obtained
decrypted information; such protection should, however, be consistent
with fully protecting defendants\' rights to a fair trial.\
An earlier version of this bill suggested the power to alter \"hardware
or software that allows plaintext to be obtained even if attempts were
made to protect it through encryption\", effectively allowing the
goverment to perform secret break-ins and alterations in computers. This
was not reiterated in the final draft.

[**Advanced Encryption Standard**\
NIST]{#aes} has approved an [Advanced Encryption
Standard](http://csrc.nist.gov/CryptoToolkit/aes/) (AES), FIPS 197, the
successor of DES.\
Minimum acceptability requirements, evaluation criteria, and submission
requirements were discussed at a 15 April 1997 workshop. The object of
NIST was to create a standard with significant advantages over
triple-DES. The standard should use a strong algorithm, regardless of
the legal climate, with a (possibly variable) large key length (at least
128 bits). On 12 September 1997, NIST put out a call for candidate
algorithms. Fifteen proposals were narrowed down to five, of which on 2
October 2000 Rijndael was selected as the draft FIPS. A notice was
published in the Federal Register on 28 February 2001, opening a 90-day
public-comment period. After incorporating minor changes from submitted
comments, Rijndael was officially approved and announced in the [Federal
Register]{href\"http:="" csrc.nist.gov="" cryptotoolkit="" aes=""
frn-fips197.pdf\"=""}, becoming effective on 26 May 2002.

**[Domestic Security Enhancement Act 2003]{#us_patriot2} (Patriot II)**\
A draft Domestic Security Enhancement Act 2003 (Patriot II) of 9 January
2003 leaked out in February 2003 (see the
[text](http://www.dailyrotten.com/source-docs/patriot2draft.html), also
in [pdf](http://www.pbs.org/now/politics/patriot2-hi.pdf)). Section 404
would criminalize the knowing and wilful use of crypto to conceal a
federal crime, with a punishment of up to 5 years for first offenses or
10 years for second or subsequent offenses. The explanatory report
suggests that these \"additional penalties are warranted to deter the
use of encryption technology to conceal criminal activity\". The bill
has not been submitted to Congress.

**Congress bills**\
On 16 June 1997, Senators Kerrey, McCain, and Hollings introduced a bill
largely similar to the government draft key-recovery legislation, the
[Secure Public Networks
Act](http://www.cdt.org/crypto/legis_105/mccain_kerrey/billtext.html)
(S. 909). It has similar provisions on registration of CAs and KRAs, on
criminalization of encryption in furtherance of a criminal offense, on
release of recovery information (under broader conditions than the June
amendment to the government bill), on international negotiations, and on
the voluntary nature of the infrastructure. Additionally, it would
require government use and government funding of encryption products to
be based on key recovery crypto, establish an Information Security
Board, and provide a waiver authority for the president in cases
affecting national security. The bill was approved by the Senate
Commerce Committee on 19 June 1997, including several amendments. See
[more information](http://www.cdt.org/crypto/legis_105/mccain_kerrey/)
on the bill by CDT.

An [inofficial proposed amendment](http://jya.com/fbi-tad-s909.htm) to
the Secure Public Networks Act, circulating in the government by the end
of August 1997, would prohibit the manufacture, distribution, sale or
import of non-key recovery cryptography (not its use or possession). The
draft amendment contains several other changes, e.g., dropping the
requirement for CA registration that the CA ensures recovery information
to have been escrowed. In a 3 September 1997 Senate subcommittee
hearing, FBI Director [Freeh backed](http://jya.com/fbi-gak.txt) this
draft legislation, but saying that key recovery should be mandatory, not
voluntary; Commerce Undersecretary Reinsch commented that this was not
the administration\'s policy. According to Jim Bidzos, President Clinton
at a private dinner in September 1997 also stated not to support the
domestic encryption controls being considered in Congress. In February
1998, Kerrey and McCain were said to circulate a somewhat revised
version of their bill, requiring a court order for law enforcement
access, and dropping the link between digital-signature-key
certification and key recovery. [On 4 March 1998, the senators announced
a new version of the bill, which retains the establishment of an
advisory board to decide upon easing export restrictions; in the new
version, the board would consist of eight industry and four government
representatives.]{#goodleah}

Representative Markey introduced a bill on 19 June 1997, the
[Communications Privacy and Consumer Empowerment
Act](http://www.house.gov/markey/privacy.htm) (H.R. 1964). The bill
would prohibit restrictions on the use or sale in interstate commerce of
encryption software, regardless of the medium used or length of
encryption key. Further, the government would be prohibited from
conditioning certificates of authority or certificates of authentication
upon any key escrow system.

Goodlatte\'s SAFE Act ([see above](#lgb_bills)), aimed at relaxing
export controls, was substantially amended by the House Permanent Select
Committee on Intelligence, effectively imposing mandatory key escrow
(the Goss/Dicks amendment). The House Commerce Committee, on 25
September 1997, rejected a similar amendment (Oxley/Manton); instead, it
adopted an amendment by Markey and White to create a National Electronic
Technologies (NET) Center, a federal information clearinghouse on
encryption, which is to assist law enforcement by examining techniques
to facilitate the efficient access to plaintext. Also, the amendment
doubled the penalty for using encryption in furtherance of a felony.
Goodlatte\'s prohibition of mandatory key escrow was maintained by the
Commerce Committee. The SAFE did not make it to a vote in the House,
given the many competing versions, and given that the chair of the House
Rules Committee, Solomon, had declared to only move the Act to the floor
if it contained a mandatory key escrow provision. The SAFE act was
reintroduced in 1999, see below.

[The Leahy bill]{#leahburn} ([see above](#leahy)) affirms the right of
citizens to use encryption without restrictions in the US (except in
furtherance to a felony to impede law enforcement). The Burns bill ([see
above](#burns)) also affirms the right to freely use encryption;
besides, it would limit the authority of the federal government to set
standards for encryption products used by businesses and individuals,
particularly standards which result in products with limited key lengths
and key escrow. [The E-PRIVACY Act (]{#markey}[see
above](#us_E-PRIVACY)) would similarly prohibit the government from
mandating key escrow or key recovery.

The Leahy bill ([see above](#leahy)) would penalize the use of
encryption in furtherance to a felony, if the encryption is intended to
obstruct investigation. It creates a framework for key escrow agents,
including strict requirements for law enforcement access; anyone is free
to use non-escrowed cryptography. On June 27, 1995, Senator Grassley
introduced the Anti-Electronic Racketeering Act (S.974), which, if
enacted, would virtually ban encryption. Only the use of escrow-like
software would be an affirmative defense for those prosecuted for using
cryptography. The bill doesn\'t seem to have much support at present.

The [E-PRIVACY
Act](http://www.epic.org/crypto/legislation/eprivacy.html) of Ashcroft
and Leahy, introduced on 12 May 1998, would also penalize using
cryptography to conceal incriminating information in the commission of a
federal felony with 5-10 years\' imprisonment. Like the Markey/White
amendment to the SAFE act (see section above), the bill would create a
NET Center to assist law enforcement. The bill would prohibit the
government from mandating key escrow or key recovery.

On 25 February 1999, Rep. Goodlatte reintroduced the Security And
Freedom through Encryption Act (**SAFE**) (H.R. 850) (see
[above](#safeprotect) for Congressional developments). SAFE would
safeguard everyone\'s right to use cryptography, prohibit the government
from mandating key recovery, and it would penalize crypto use to conceal
criminal conduct. The Commerce Committee, on 23 June 1999, amended the
act, making it a crime not to comply with a decryption order, with
penalties of up to ten years. The Permanent Select Committee (which does
not have jurisdiction over the bill), on 15 July 1999, added a provision
to permit law enforcement to gain access to decryption information with
a warrant.

On 14 April 1999, Sen. McCain introduced the Promote Reliable On-Line
Transactions to Encourage Commerce and Trade (**PROTECT**) Act of 1999
(S. 798) (see [above](#safeprotect) for Congressional developments). The
bill prohibits the government from mandating key recovery. It does not
contain a provision to criminalize the use of crypto to cover up a
crime.

On 27 July 1999, Rep. Goss introduced the *Tax Relief for Responsible
Encryption Act of 1999*(H.R. 2617), which would offer a 15% tax credit
for the costs of developing and producing recoverable cryptography
(i.e., systems which can provide the government with plaintext without
the user\'s knowledge). Also on 27 July 1999, as an alternative to the
[SAFE](#safeprotect3) Act, Rep. Goss introduced the *Encryption for
National Interests Act* (H.R. 2616), which would, among others, allow
domestic use of all crypto, not mandate key recovery, and require a
court warrant for accessing encrypted data or communications.

See the [EFF Privacy, Security, Crypto, Surveillance
Archive](http://www.eff.org/pub/Crypto/) and the [EPIC Key Escrow
Page](http://www.epic.org/crypto/key_escrow/).

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Uruguay]{#ur} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**1. Export/ import**\
Import is not restricted.

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
There are no restrictions on crypto use.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Venezuela]{#ven} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
There are no regulations on crypto use.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Vietnam]{#vi} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**1. Export/ import controls**

Import of encryption technology for protection of confidential data
requires a license from the Ministry of Trade. If the technology is
telecommunications equipment, an additional license from the VN Post
Office is required.\
There is a personal-use exemption for travellers with crypto software on
a laptop.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Please send comments, corrections, updates, additional information, and
questions to *<E.J.Koops@uvt.nl>*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**© Bert-Jaap Koops, 1996-2013. All rights reserved.**\
Updated on 25 February 2013.

*general:* [homepage Bert-Jaap
Koops](http://www.tilburguniversity.edu/webwijs/show/?uid=e.j.koops) \|
[mail](mailto:E.J.Koops@uvt.nl)\
*this topic:* [FAQ](cls-faq.htm) \| [new](cls-new.htm) \|
[sources](cls-srce.htm) \| [addresses](cls-addr.htm)
