**Version 27.0, February 2013**

**Â© Bert-Jaap Koops**

Licensed under Creative Commons Attribution Share Alike 4.0 International.

SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0

## [Australia]{#aus} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 1, 3, 5, 8\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
Export is regulated through the [Defence and Strategic Goods
List](http://www.dao.defence.gov.au/exportcontrols/dld_dsgl.html), last
changed in June 1999 according to the December 1998
[Wassenaar](#Wassenaar) Arrangement. This includes the General
Technology Note, exempting public-domain software from controls.
Mass-market software is regulated according to the Wassenaar limits.
There is a personal-use exemption (export is allowed for lawful
permanent residents, provided they keep control of the crypto and make
sure it is not transferred anywhere; a record must be kept for 3 years).

Before the 1999 implementation of Wassenaar, [export
regulations](http://iic.spirit.net.au/imat/publications/excontrl/excohome.htm)
of December 1996 (see Cat 5.doc) were in accordance with the
pre-December 1998 [Wassenaar](#Wassenaar) Arrangement, with the
exception of the General Software Note. Written permission was needed
for exporting cryptographic equipment designed to ensure the secrecy of
communications or stored information. Public-domain or generally
available crypto-software were included in the export controls (only
public-domain \"technology\" (i.e. specific information necessary for
the use of goods) was excluded).

Approval is also required for software that does not itself contain
cryptography, but which has an interface specially designed for plugging
in cryptography.

Crypto software transmitted electronically (e.g., over the Internet) was
apparently not controlled. In mid-1998, the Defence Department became
concerned that electronic exports were not covered by the controls, and
to counter this, they have apparently threatened to use the Weapons of
Mass Destruction Act. This in turn triggered a
[campaign](http://www.efa.org.au/Publish/PR980630.html) by Electronic
Frontiers Australia. After six months, the Defence Signals Directorate
determined that no license was required for an online mirror of PGPi,
provided that a warning is contained in the download page that the
downloader may infringe Australian export rules if he does not have
export approval; apparently, the burden of seeking a license is thus
shifted to the downloader rather than the person who makes software
available electronically.

Compare Nick Ellsmore\'s
[Cryptology](http://cryptome.org/crypto97-ne.htm) for background on the
Australian situation.

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
On 27 September 2001, the *Cybercrime Act,* No. 161, 2001, was passed,
based on the Council of Europe\'s (then draft) *[Convention on
Cybercrime](#coe)*. Item 12 of the law inserts a [section
3LA](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consol_act/ca191482/s3la.html)
in the Crimes Act 1914, that requires release of encryption keys or
decryption of encrypted data, upon a magistrate\'s order. The order may
be granted if there are reasonable grounds for suspecting evidential
material is held in or accessible from a computer, and the specified
person is a suspect or (an employee of) the owner or lessee of the
computer, who has relevant knowledge of the encryption. Failure to
comply with the order was initially punishable with up to six months\'
imprisonment; this was later raised to two years\' imprisonment. The
same power is granted in [section
201A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consol_act/ca1901124/s201a.html)
of the Customs Act 1901, which retains the maximum punishment of six
months\' imprisonment. Since the order can explicitly be given to
suspects, the privilege against self-incrimination ([section
128](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consol_act/ea199580/s128.html)
Evidence Act 1995) seems overruled by this statutory provision and hence
would not apply. In practice, the focus of s. 3LA seems to be on
non-suspects such as system administrators rather than suspects; for a
critical discussion of this addressing non-suspects to assist in law
enforcement, see James, Nickolas John (2004) Handing over the keys :
Contingency, power and resistance in the context of section 3LA of the
Australian Crimes Act 1914. *The University of Queensland Law Journal*,
*23* 1: 7-21.

**3. Developments in cryptography regulation**\
*Earlier developments\
* There has been an apparently unfounded rumour in the mid-1990s that
Australia was planning to restrict banks to Government Access to Keys.

At the [OECD meeting](#oecd) of December 1995, Australia expressed
little interest in the use of Trusted Third Parties for judicial access
to keys. Instead, the paper of the delegation suggested to require
suspects to decrypt in case of a warrant; this would require the rules
against self-incrimination to be adapted.

A 1996 [report by Gerard
Walsh](http://www.efa.org.au/Issues/Crypto/Walsh/), *Review of policy
relating to encryption technologies*, was barred from public release in
February 1997 by the Attorney-General\'s Department. After a freedom of
information request by Electronic Frontiers Australia (EFA), it was
released, and it is now available online at EFA. The main finding of the
Review was that major legislative action was not advised at the time to
safeguard national security and law-enforcement interests, although a
range of minor legislative and other actions were indicated (such as the
creation of an aggregate statute on intrusive investigative powers). The
review did not recommend specific options for encryption legislation at
the time. One action indicated was to consider establishing a further
and more serious category of offence where encryption is used to
obstruct government investigation into a criminal offence, and to
consider creating a power to require production of crypto keys (or other
recovery information). The review did not support mandatory key recovery
at that stage.

Compare Nick Ellsmore\'s
[Cryptology](http://cryptome.org/crypto97-ne.htm) for background on the
Australian situation.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)
