**Version 27.0, February 2013**

**© Bert-Jaap Koops**
**Portions © Analog Devices, Inc. **  

Licensed under Creative Commons Attribution Share Alike 4.0 International.

SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0

## [Council of Europe]{#coe} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5\]

**2. Domestic laws and regulations\
**On 23 November 2001, the Council of Europe adopted the [Convention on
Cybercrime](http://conventions.coe.int/Treaty/EN/findknownste.asp?CM=1)
\[search for convention 185\] (see the
[text](http://conventions.coe.int/Treaty/en/Treaties/Html/185.htm) and
[Explanatory
Report](http://conventions.coe.int/Treaty/en/Reports/Html/185.htm)).
The Convention deals with substantive and procedural criminal law. \
Article 18 contains a production order: \"Each party shall adopt such
legislative and other measures as may be necessary to empower its
competent authorities to order: a). a person in its territory to submit
specified computer data in that person\'s possession or control, which
is stored in a computer system of a computer-data storage medium\".
Para. 176 of the Explanatory Memorandum adds that \"Parties could
establish obligations that the specified computer data (\...) must be
produced in the manner specified in the order. This could include
reference (\...) to form, such as that the data or information be
provided in \'plain text\' (\...).\" Hence, the convention allows, but
does not oblige, party states to create a decryption order.\
Section 62 of the [Explanatory
Memorandum](http://conventions.coe.int/treaty/EN/projets/CyberRapex.htm)
specifies the clause \"without right\" that is used in describing
several offences the treaty penalises. It explicitly states that
encryption \"should in principle be considered a legitimate protection
of privacy and, therefore, be considered as being undertaken with
right\". So, encryption can not be outlawed by party states, although
the phrase \"in principle\" allows for a certain margin of appreciation.

The Convention was signed on 23 November 2001 by 26 of the 43 CoE Member
States, as well as by Canada, Japan, South Africa and the United States
(who participated in the drafting process). Later, several states
followed. As soon as 5 countries have ratified the convention, it will
enter into force. (As of 8 January 2004, four countries had ratified.)
The convention will not be directly applicable, but will have to be
implemented by party states in their national laws. See the [list of
signatures and
ratifications](http://conventions.coe.int/Treaty/EN/searchsig.asp?NT=185&CM=&DF=)
for the current status of the convention.  

*History of the Convention\
*A Committee of Experts on Crime in Cyber-Space (PC-CY) was established
in January 1997, and published a first [draft
text](http://conventions.coe.int/treaty/en/projets/cybercrime.htm) for
discussion on 27 April 2000 (version 19). The Assembly of the CoE
approved a further draft on 24 April 2001, and a new [version (no.
27)](http://conventions.coe.int/treaty/EN/projets/cybercrime27.htm) was
published on 25 May 2001 (CDPC (2001) 2 rev). 

The production order was earlier included in article 14 of the draft
(version 19). Article 14, section 5 read: \"Each Party shall take such
legislative and other measures as may be necessary to empower its
competent authorities to order for the purposes of criminal
investigations and proceedings any person who has knowledge about the
functioning of the computer system or measures applied to secure the
computer data therein to provide all necessary information, as is
reasonable, to enable the undertaking of the measures referred to in
paragraphs 1 \[search\] and 4 \[seizure\].\"\
The \"measures applied to secure the computer data\" included
cryptography. It was not quite clear whether the provision included a
decryption order. Given the purpose of the seizure power of article 14,
section 4 (\"to seize or similarly secure computer data accessed (\...)
in view of their possible use in criminal investigations and
proceedings\"), one might infer that section 5 should be read as
requiring persons to provide decryption information that enable the use
of seized encrypted data in criminal proceedings. Admittedly, the text
was a bit muddy here.\
The text refers only to criminal investigation, not to national security
purposes. Since section 7 refers to the \"conditions and safeguards
under national law\", states must respect the privilege against
self-incrimination, which is incorporated in article 6 of the European
Convention on Human Rights and hence should be respected in national
laws. Consequently, states should not require suspects to decrypt.

Earlier on, key escrow may have been considered in the draft convention.
According to the 25 November 1998
[minutes](http://www.echo.lu/legal/en/lab/981125/minutes.html#9) of the
EU\'s Legal Advisory Board, it was unclear \"whether the convention will
contain any provisions on escrow of encryption algorithms\". The current
text does not contain anything to suggest key escrow.

**3. Developments in cryptography regulation**\
The Council of Europe (a 46-member intergovernmental organisation, whose
treaties are not directly applicable in national law), in its
[Recommendation R (95) 13 Concerning Problems of Criminal Procedure Law
Connected with Information
Technology](http://www.privacy.org/pi/intl_orgs/coe/info_tech_1995.html)
of 11 September 1995, stated that \"measures should be considered to
minimise the negative effects of the use of cryptography on the
investigation of criminal offenses, without affecting its legitimate use
more than is strictly necessary.\" The recommendation itself does not
state *which* measures should be taken or *how* the \"balance must be
found\" in the \"conflict of interests between the needs of the users
and law enforcement\".

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)
