**Version 27.0, February 2013**

**© Bert-Jaap Koops**
**Portions © Analog Devices, Inc. **  

Licensed under Creative Commons Attribution Share Alike 4.0 International.

SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0

## [Denmark]{#de} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 1, 4, 5, 9\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
There are export controls according to the (pre-December 1998)
[Wassenaar Arrangement](#Wassenaar), including the General Software
Note. The Danish representative agreed to the December 1998 Wassenaar
changes, but this has met with serious resistance in the Danish
parliament and the government\'s IT Security Council (see an
[article](http://cph.ing.dk/konf/root/netnyt/html/0084.html) in
Danish).\
The [Danish Encryption Policy](http://www.fsk.dk) (click on Emneord,
Kryptering), published by the four responsible ministers on 7 April
2000, is based on the principle that \"Efforts should be made to ensure
the greatest possible liberalization of export control for dual-use
goods and technologies, within the EU and Wassenaar, but with due
consideration for the need to remain in control of the spreading of very
sensitive products to sensitive end-users.\"\
Import is not controlled, and this policy will be maintained, as
confirmed the first principle of the Danish Encryption Policy.

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
None.

**3. Developments in cryptography regulation**\
The Danish Technology Council, in an October 1995 report, discussed
several options for cryptography policy, varying from doing nothing to
prohibiting cryptography, without really taking a stand itself.
According to the report, the issue is a Gordian knot, which should be
cut soon by the Danish government.

The Danish IT Security Council adopted a policy on encryption in June
1996. The Council recommended that no limitations on encryption use
should be introduced. Only in the case of telecommunications companies
providing encryption as an integral part of their services, the
companies should be able to decrypt a communication through a court
order. The Council was of the opinion that secure and inviolable
communication should be promoted and that any encryption prohibition at
present is an illusion in reality, given the spread of efficient
cryptography through the Internet.

A departmental Expert Committee, appointed in the summer of 1996 in
preparation for a final decision on the crypto issue by the government,
released its [Report by the Expert Committee on
Cryptography](http://www.fsk.dk/fsk/publ/1997/crypt/crypt.html) in April
1997. The Committee, under pressure of time, restricted its study to a
regulation of the *sale* of cryptography (not its manufacture, use or
import). The Committee recommended that no regulation of cryptography
should be introduced presently. It further recommended that the Expert
Committee should continue to follow international developments, and
carry out an analysis to assess the possibilities and consequences of
introducing incentive schemes to induce people to use key-recovery
crypto.

The Expert Committee was allowed to continue its work, and in May 1998,
it presented its final conclusions ([press
release](http://www.fsk.dk/fsk/presse/260698.html) in Danish) in a
\"Report on incentive solutions\" (updated version available in
[Danish](http://www.fsk.dk/fsk/publ/1998/krypt/) and partly in
[English](http://www.fsk.dk/fsk/publ/1998/krypt/eng/clean.htm)). The
report recommended that no restrictions should be established on
citizens\' and companies\' encryption capabilities. No initiative should
be made to incite people to use key-recovery cryptography. Still, the
Danish government should not reject the possibility of a future crypto
regulation. The international development should be monitored, and the
crypto question should be answered anew if an international direction of
crypto policies should emerge.

The government was to take a final position on the crypto question in
1998, but it was only on 7 April 2000 that four ministers published a
letter to the IT-security Council with the [Danish Encryption
Policy](http://www.fsk.dk) (click on Emneord, Kryptering). The four
principles stress that the current policy of free use of encryption will
be maintained. Moreover, the Danish government will actively promote the
dissemination and use of strong encryption in Denmark. Denmark will not
implement key recovery regulations, but the government should \"also be
mindful of the continued need of the police, in accordance with the
legal protection guarantees afforded by the Administration of Justice
Act, to make use of existing means of investigation to prevent and clear
up crime.\"

The Danish Teletrust Group has set up an Encryption Group to work on the
technical and legal concept of public-key certifying authorities. A
Centre Certifying Authority (CCA) would coordinate control and
certification of key centres to provide secure keys within
telecommunications. It would be necessary for such a CCA to have a legal
basis. The Danish government has not (yet) implemented the initiative
into law.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.md)
