**Version 27.0, February 2013**

**© Bert-Jaap Koops**
**Portions © Analog Devices, Inc. **  

Licensed under Creative Commons Attribution Share Alike 4.0 International.

SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0

# [Finland]{#fi} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 4, 5, 8\]

## 1. Export/ import controls  
Import of cryptography is not regulated.

For export, a license is required through the *Export Control of
Dual-Use Goods Act* (562/96), which implements the [EU
recommendation](#eu_exp) on export of dual-use goods and the
[Wassenaar](#Wassenaar)Arrangement. A license is not needed if the
crypto product is sold freely in retail and does not require extensive
vendor support.\
The Ministry of Trade and Industry
[announced](http://ktm.elinar.fi/ktm/fin/ktmtiedo.nsf/b6638ff99f5f2761c22565af004ad877/63e4491893d2682ec22569ab0033a535?OpenDocument)
(in Finnish) on 4 December 2000 that as of Spring 2001, mass-market
cryptographic software of unlimited key length can be freely exported to
all countries, in line with the Wassenaar Arrangement decision of 1
December 2000.

The government agreed upon a crypto policy on 7 October 1998. The
*National Cryptography Policy guidelines* of 12 October 1998 (copy
available in
[Finnish](http://www.cis.hut.fi/kaip/wassenaar/salauspolitiikkamuistio.html%22%22){???=""})
affirm the commitment to the Wassenaar Arrangement and EU
recommendation. However, Finland aims to influence the reform of the
international export regulations so that control lists correspond to
technical development, and to ensure that the necessary restrictions
will not unreasonably impede normal foreign trade.

See also section 5.1 of Simo-Pekka Parviainen\'s
[thesis](http://ethesis.helsinki.fi/julkaisut/oik/julki/pg/parviainen/).

## 2. Domestic laws and regulations  
The Privacy and Data Security in Telecommunications Act of June 1999
(no. 565-1999) allow telecoms users and subscribers \"right to code
their telecommunications message in the way they wish utilising the
technical possibilities available thereto\". Telecom operators have to
inform users about the possibilities to protect communications. See
sections 5 and 6 of the
[Act](http://lm-gateway.terranova.fi/www/sivut/english/tele/statutes/1999_565.htm)
(also available in
[Finnish](http://finlex.edita.fi/cgi-bin/kortti/19990565000+Hakulause=19990565000%22){??=""}).

## 3. Developments in cryptography regulation   
At the [OECD meeting](#oecd) of December 1995, Finland did not approve
key escrow proposals. The chairman of the Finnish public
administration\'s group for data security affirmed that Finland will not
require key escrow.

The government crypto policy guidelines (in
[Finnish](http://www.cis.hut.fi/kaip/wassenaar/salauspolitiikkamuistio.html%22%22){???=""})
of 12 October 1998 affirm the support of free trade and use of
cryptography. The provision of crypto services will be subject to a
licensing and other authorization systems, based on voluntary action.
Key escrow will not be mandatory. In criminal investigation, suspects do
not have to assist in decryption of encrypted stored or transported
data, but the authorities \"may demand the provider of certification
services or the maintainer of the encryption system to hand over a
secret key in their possession or to otherwise contribute to the
investigation of individual encrypted data\". By 31 December 1998, the
Ministries of Justice and the Interior will clarify the need to reform
the Coercive Criminal Investigation Means Act.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.md)
