**Version 27.0, February 2013**

**© Bert-Jaap Koops**
**Portions © Analog Devices, Inc. **  

Licensed under Creative Commons Attribution Share Alike 4.0 International.

SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0

# [France]{#fr} \[[Sources](../sources.md) 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7\]

## 1. Export/ import controls  
France has signed the [Wassenaar](#Wassenaar) Arrangement for **export**
controls, with the exception of the (pre-December 1998) General Software
Note. See the government\'s [SSI site](http://www.ssi.gouv.fr) (under
\'Regulation\' \> \'Cryptology\') for a list of applicable laws and
decrees.

The **import** from countries outside the EU and the EEA (European
Economic Area) and **export** of cryptography is regulated by the [Law
No.
2004-575](http://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/WAspad/UnTexteDeJorf?numjo=ECOX0200175L){target="_blank"}
of 21 June 2004 for the trust in the digital economy (*Loi pour la
confiance dans l\'économie numérique*) and [Decree No.
2007-663](http://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/affichTexte.do?cidTexte=JORFTEXT000000646995&categorieLien=cid){target="_blank"}
of 2 May 2007 (*\... relatif aux moyens et aux prestations de
cryptologie*). Articles 29, 30, 31, 34, 35, 36 and 40 of the Law, and
further specified by the Decree, restrict import and export of
cryptography products and services. Cryptography that can only be used
for authentication is free of restrictions (art. 30(II)); the same holds
for various specific types of cryptography mentioned in Annex 1 of
Decree 2007-663. The procedure and forms for declaration and
authorisation are specified in an
[Order](http://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/affichTexte.do?cidTexte=JORFTEXT000000465715&categorieLien=cid){target="_blank"}
of 25 May 2007 (définissant la forme et le contenu des dossiers de
déclaration et de demande d\'autorisation d\'opérations relatives aux
moyens et aux prestations de cryptologie).\
**Import** from within the EU/EEA is free; import from other countries
is subject to declaration, except for categories designated by decree
(art. 30(III)). **Export** is subject to authorisation, except for
categories designated by decree (art. 30(IV)). Authorisations and
declarations executed prior to this law remain valid until their expiry
date (art. 40). Failure to comply with these requirements is punishable
with up to one (declaration) or two (authorisation) years\' imprisonment
and a fine of maximum 15,000 or 30,000 euro, respectively (art. 35).  

### History  
Formerly, the regulation was the law of 26 July 1996 (see [article
28](http://www.ssi.gouv.fr/fr/reglementation/lois/lois_fr4.html) (in
French)) and the decrees implementing it of 24 February 1998, [no.
98-101](http://www.ssi.gouv.fr/fr/reglementation/lois/lois_fr5.html) (in
French), as changed by decree
[2002-688](http://www.ssi.gouv.fr/fr/reglementation/lois/decret2002-688.html)
(in French), and of 17 March 1999. \
Decree 99-200 of 17 March 1999 ([text in
French](http://www.internet.gouv.fr/francais/textesref/cryptodecret99200.htm),
and
[again](http://www.ssi.gouv.fr/fr/reglementation/lois/lois_fr2.html))
specified categories of cryptography which do not require any prior
formality. Decree 99-199 of 17 March 1999 ([text in
French](http://www.internet.gouv.fr/francais/textesref/cryptodecret99199.htm)
and
[again](http://www.ssi.gouv.fr/fr/reglementation/lois/lois_fr1.html))
specified categories of cryptography for which prior declaration is
required (and no longer prior authorization). These decrees replaced the
decrees 98-206 and 98-207 of 23 March 1998 ([text in
French](http://www.in2p3.fr/secur/legal/decret98-206-tab.html)).

In accordance with Jospin\'s January 1999
[speech](http://www.premier-ministre.gouv.fr/PM/D190199.HTM) (text in
French), a law was proposed for full liberalization of crypto import. A
[Bill on the Information
Society](http://www.assemblee-nationale.fr/projets/pl3143.asp) (No.
3143, text in French) was approved by the Council of Ministers on 13
June 2001, but stranded in parliament. Chapter II of the Bill contained
an extensive revision of the crypto regulations. The import and export
rules were proposed as follows.

-   authentication-only crypto is entirely free (art. 37-II);
-   transfer from an EU member and import of crypto that can be used for
    confidentiality must be declared (decrees may specify crypto exempt
    from this requirement) (art. 37-III);
-   transfer to an EU member and export of crypto that can be used for
    confidentiality requires authorization (decrees may specify crypto
    exempt from this requirement) (art. 37-IV);
-   failure to declare is punishable with up to one year imprisonment,
    failure to comply with authorization with up to two years\' (art.
    43);
-   declarations and authorizations executed prior to this law remain
    valid until their expiry date (art. 49).

Similar provisions have now been enacted through the law on trust in the
digital economy (see above). 

## 2. Domestic laws and regulations  
France used to restrict the domestic use and supply of cryptography for
a long time (see below under History). This restrictive legislation
(authorization and declaration were required for almost all
cryptography) was slightly liberalized in 1996, when a law was passed
mandating key deposits with Trusted Third Parties (TTPs). However, the
domestic use of cryptography was liberalized in January 1999.
Subsequently, other kinds of regulation (decrytion order, raising
punishment) have followed.

### Current state of the law  
The **use** of cryptography is free, according to article 30(I) of the
[law No.
2004-575](http://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/WAspad/UnTexteDeJorf?numjo=ECOX0200175L)
of 21 June 2004 for the trust in the digital economy (*Loi pour la
confiance dans l\'économie numérique*). \
The **provision of crypto services** is subject to regulation: service
provision must be declared, except for services designated by decree
that do not harm security or defense interests. Service providers are
subject to professional secrecy (art. 31 of the digital-economy act).
Failure to declare is punishable with up to two years\' imprisonment and
a fine of up to 30,000 euro (art. 35(III)). The law also creates
liability for service providers that store private keys (art. 32).
Moreover, the Prime Minister can prohibit circulation of cryptography
if its supplier does not comply with the regulations, even of the supply
is free of charge (art. 34, sanctioned with up to two years\'
imprisonment (art. 35(II)). 

The *[Law
2001-1062](http://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/citoyen/jorf_nor.ow?numjo=INTX0100032L)
of 15 November 2001 on daily security* (*JO* 16 November 2001, p. 18215)
introduced provisions on decryption assistance and a decryption order. \
For **decryption assistance**, article 30 inserts a Title IV in the
*Code of Criminal Procedure* that entails a power to require all
qualified persons to decrypt or to hand over decryption keys if
encrypted data are encountered during an investigation (art. 230-1 para.
1 FCCP). \'Qualified persons\' is a term used in the Code for experts
who are qualified, for instance by being officially registered, to
perform scientific or technical investigations. The provision can
therefore be invoked to require assistance, for example, of
cryptanalytic experts, or of encryption providers who (depending on the
architecture of their service) might assist in decrypting data from
their customers.\
If it is necessary for the investigation of a crime with a maximum
penalty of at least two years\' imprisonment, the police can ask the
national-security services to crack encrypted data (art. 230-1 para. 2
through 230-5 FCCP). To this end, a Technical Assistance Center (Centre
technique d\'assistance) has been created within the Ministry of the
Interior by [Decree
2002-1073](http://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/WAspad/UnTexteDeJorf?numjo=INTC0200141D)
of 7 August 2002 (*JO* 10 August 2002, p. 13713), the activities of
which are secret.  \
A **decryption order** was introduced by Article 31(II), in the form of
a penalization in the *Criminal Code*: someone who fails to comply with
a decryption order is punishable with a maximum of three years\'
imprisonment and 45,000 euro, or with five years\' and 75,000 euro if
decryption could have prevented or mitigated the effects of a crime
(art. 434-15-2 FCC). There is no explicit mirroring provision in the
Code of Criminal Procedure regulating the conditions for the police to
give a decryption order; apparently, titles II and III of book 1 of the
French Code of Criminal Procedure contain an implicit power to order
someone to hand over a decryption key or password or to decrypt herself.
In the parliamentary proceedings, there has been no discussion whether
the provision is compatible with the privilege against
self-incrimination; in light of the traditional inquisitorial character
of French criminal procedure, it should be assumed that suspects can be
ordered to hand over keys or to decrypt.\
According to article 31(I), TTPs offering confidentiality services are
required to hand over the decryption keys of their customers or to
decrypt themselves, under threat of two years\' imprisonment and a fine
of 45,000 euro (art. 11-1 of the *Law of 10 July 1991 on the secrecy of
correspondence by telecommunications*). 

**Maximum penalties** for crimes are **raised** if cryptography was used
to prepare or commit a crime or to facilitate the preparation or
commission of a crime, according to article 37 of the [law No.
2004-575](http://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/WAspad/UnTexteDeJorf?numjo=ECOX0200175L)
of 21 June 2004 for the trust in the digital economy (*Loi pour la
confiance dans l\'économie numérique*). The maximum punishments of
crimes punishable with up to three years\' imprisonment are doubled, and
higher maximum punishments are raised one category (with categories of
5, 7, 10, 15, 20, 30 years and life imprisonment). The punishment does
not apply, however, if the perpetrator, upon request, submits the
plaintext and private key of encrypted messages; therefore, this
provision also functions as an indirect form of a **decryption order**.

**Investigation powers** are attributed to competent officials to
investigate crimes related to the crypto regulations, including search
and seizure of cryptography. Failure to comply with a request for
information or documents or blocking the investigation is punishable
with up to six months\' imprisonment and a fine of 7,500 euro (art. 36).

### History of French domestic crypto laws  
Before 1996, delivery, importation, exportation, and use of cryptography
were subjected to: a) prior declaration if the cryptography can have no
other object than authenticating communications or assuring the
integrity of transmitted messages; b) prior authorisation by the Prime
Minister in all other cases.

Simplified procedures existed for certain cryptography products or
services or certain user categories. For authorisation, a dossier
containing technical details and administrative data had to be
submitted. Authorisation could be subjected to certain conditions in
order to reserve the use of certain types of cryptography to defined
user or application categories.

A press release of 16 October 1995 specified that use of cryptography
for protecting passwords, access codes, subscriber numbers or bank card
numbers for authentication purposes only necessitated a declaration by
the provider when installing the service.

On 18 June 1996, France passed a law adapting its restrictions on
cryptography (text in
[English](http://www.telecom.gouv.fr/english/activ/telecom/nloi17.htm)
or
[French](http://www.telecom.gouv.fr/francais/activ/telecom/nloi17.htm)).
The law was published in the *Journal Officiel* on 27 July 1996 and is
referred to as the 26th July law. Decrees on the application of the law
(which have to be promulgated before the law is applicable) were
published on 25 February 1998 (see the [Journal
Officiel](http://www.legifrance.gouv.fr) of that date) (decree 98-101 of
24 February 1998 on the conditions of declarations and authorizations,
and decree 98-102 of 24 February 1998 on the conditions for key escrow
agencies), and several more decrees were published on 13 and 23 March
1998.

Cryptography that does not provide confidentiality could be used without
restriction (so the prior requirement of declaration is cancelled);
supply of authentication-only cryptography still had to be declared. Use
and supply of confidentiality cryptography required authorization.
Decree 98-206 of 23 March 1998 ([text in
French](http://www.in2p3.fr/secur/legal/decret98-206-tab.html))
specified categories of cryptography which did not require declaration
or authorization (such as video-scramblers and ATMs). A supplier was
exempted from the formalities for use exclusively for developing,
validating, or demonstrating cryptography, if he informed SCSSI at least
two weeks in advance. No authorization was given for cryptography for
use by radio amateurs. A supply authorization for collective use
exempted users from acquiring a use authorization. The use of
cryptography with key lengths limited to 40 bits was exempted from
declaration or authorization if ciphertexts can be cracked in maximum of
2^40^ trials, according to decree 98-207 of 23 March 1998 ([text in
French](http://www.in2p3.fr/secur/legal/decret98-207-tab.html)) (this
requirement was interpreted by [Yves le
Roux](http://www.opengroup.org/security/meetings/apr98/french-regulation.pdf)
as a requirement to incorporate in every ciphertext a known plaintext
(that is given to the authorities) to enable a known-plaintext attack);
the supply of such cryptography was subject to declaration.

The law furthermore introduced Trusted Third Parties (TTPs), or rather,
Key Escrow Agencies (KEA). If a KEA and its key-escrow scheme had been
approved, users who escrowed their keys with the KEA would be able to
freely use the cryptography scheme with these keys. The KEAs would be
required to hand over keys to law enforcement under certain conditions.
The only authorized Key Escrow Agency was SCSSI, according to a decree
of 13 March 1998.

Decree 98-102 ([text in
French](http://www.telecom.gouv.fr/francais/activ/telecom/deccrypto2.htm))
specified the conditions for KEAs. It addressed, among others, the
duration of a license to operate, the information the KEA had to provide
to SCSSI, the information to register, user contract terms, a register
of key requests by law enforcement and a separate (classified) one for
key requests by security agencies, security measures, and how to handle
when ceasing the activity. KEA employees were required to have a French
security clearance.

In a 16 January 1998 [press
release](http://www.telecom.gouv.fr/francais/comdis/cp160198.htm), State
Secretary of Industry Pierret welcomed the statement by Jospin that
56-bit cryptography should be liberalized as soon as possible to a
simple regime of authorization.

The action plan on \"Electronic Commerce\" [(see part III, \"Creating
Confidence\", in particular part
III.3)](http://www.finances.gouv.fr/commerce_electronique/lorentz/confiance.htm),
published 7 January 1998 by a task force led by Francis Lorentz, stated
that the government was \"resolutely oriented towards a liberal reading
of the law\". It urged a rapid implementation of the new law. It
proposed further:

-   a strong communication policy to promote the decrees;
-   to promote with its (especially European) partners the principles
    underlying the policy;
-   to bring about an agreement with France\'s most important trading
    partners on the principles and establishment of TTPs/ key deposits;
-   to regularly review the regulatory framework (in particular, the
    40-bit limit should be reviewed rapidly), conducting a broad
    consultation on this before the end of 1998;
-   a government TTP/deposit service to be established as a role model,
    while stressing the importance of developing private operators for
    this function as well;
-   that the decrees should not impose technical architectures for TTPs,
    but should limit themselves to functional demands.

It was unclear to what extent the restrictive regulation was enforced in
practice; it was rumoured to be widely ignored. It seemed impossible for
individuals or enterprises to obtain authorisation for \"strong\"
cryptography. Even for state-owned industry, cryptography that does not
serve military or high-grade security purposes had to be breakable.
SCSSI, the office dealing with authorisation, rendered decisions without
motivation. []{#fr_Summary}

For the state of the law **before 1999** (NOTE: this is outdated now),
see also the [summary of the French encryption
regulation](http://www.opengroup.org/security/meetings/apr98/french-regulation.pdf)
(in pdf) by Yves le Roux, including a list of the then applicable laws
and decrees. The French **pre-1999 regulation (now outdated)** could be
summed up in the following table (reprinted with the kind permission of
[Yves le
Roux](http://www.opengroup.org/security/meetings/apr98/french-regulation.pdf)):

  ----------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------- -------------------------------- ---------------------------- ---------------
  **functionality**                               **supply**                          **import from outside EU/EEA**   **use**                      **export**
  authentication-only                             declaration                         declaration                      free                         declaration
  confidentiality with key length under 40 bits   authorization or declaration (\*)   authorization or free (\*)       authorization or free (\*)   authorization
  confidentiality using Key Escrow Agency         authorization                       authorization                    free                         authorization
  other confidentiality                           authorization                       authorization                    authorization                authorization
  ----------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------- -------------------------------- ---------------------------- ---------------

(\*) The dispensation was given for crypto which is sure to be cracked
in maximum 2^40^ rounds.

At a [press
conference](http://www.premier-ministre.gouv.fr/PM/D190199.HTM) (text in
French) on 19 January 1999, Prime Minister Jospin announced the
liberalization of the domestic crypto legislation. Use of cryptography
of up to 128 bits is allowed as per direct (this was raised from 40
bits), while a law is being prepared for the complete liberalization of
crypto use (see below). The mandatory nature of key deposits with TTPs
is abolished.\
These changes were implemented in decrees 99-200 of 17 March 1999 ([text
in
French](http://www.internet.gouv.fr/francais/textesref/cryptodecret99200.htm))
and decree 99-199 of 17 March 1999 ([text in
French](http://www.internet.gouv.fr/francais/textesref/cryptodecret99199.htm)),
pending the law which is to offer full liberalization of crypto use. See
the summary table above (under 1) for a specification of cryptography of
which the use is free.

Subsequently, a law was proposed to relax the previous restrictive
crypto regulations. As outlined in the October 1999 [*Policy
paper*](http://www.finances.gouv.fr/societe_information/anglais/chapitre3_ang.htm#3.4)
*on the adaptation of the legal framework to the information society,*
the [Bill on the Information
Society](http://www.assemblee-nationale.fr/projets/pl3143.asp) (No.
3143, text in French) was approved by the Council of Ministers on 13
June 2001 (see [general
information](http://www.internet.gouv.fr/francais/textesref/pagsi2/lsi.htm)
in French on this bill). The bill stranded in parliament, however.
Chapter II of the Bill contained an extensive revision of the crypto
regulations. Some of these amendments (below indicated with (#)) were
enacted in the November 2001 *Law on daily security*, others (indicated
with &) in the June 2004 *Law on trust in the digital economy* (see
above). The proposed domestic rules were as follows. 

-   *use and provision*
    -   use of crypto is entirely free (art. 37-I); (&)
    -   authentication-only crypto is entirely free (art. 37-II); (&)
    -   provision of cryptography that can be used for confidentiality
        must be declared (decrees may specify crypto exempt from this
        requirement) (art. 37-III); failure to declare is punishable
        with up to one year imprisonment (art. 43); declarations
        executed prior to this law remain valid until their expiry date
        (art. 49);  (&)
-   *TTP services*
    -   provision of crypto *services* must be declared (sanctioned with
        up to two years\' imprisonment (art. 43-III)); such TTPs can
        subject themselves to voluntary accreditation (art. 38);
    -   TTPs are held liable under certain conditions, both for
        confidentiality (art. 39) (&) and authentication (art. 40)
        services;
    -   the Prime Minister can prohibit circulation of cryptography
        if its supplier does not comply with the regulations (art. 41,
        sanctioned with up to two years\' imprisonment (art. 43-II));
        (&)
    -   Key Escrow Agencies have to decrypt or give decryption keys upon
        order, sanctioned with up to two year\'s imprisonment (art. 42);
        (#)
-   *criminal procedure and decryption order*
    -   competent officials are attributed several powers to investigate
        crimes related to the crypto regulations; failure to comply with
        a request for information or documents or blocking the
        investigation is punishable with up to six months\' imprisonment
        (art. 44); (&)
    -   if cryptography was used to facilitate the preparation or
        commission of a crime, the maximum punishment can be raised by a
        certain amount (but not if the offendant handed over plaintext
        or decryption keys) (art. 45); (&)
    -   failure to comply with a decryption order (see below) is
        punishable with maximum three years\' imprisonment, or with five
        years\' if decryption could have prevented or mitigated the
        effects of a crime (art. 46); (#)
    -   a power is introduced to require all qualified persons to
        decrypt or to hand over decryption keys if encrypted data are
        encountered during an investigation (proposed art. 230-1 para. 1
        FCCP); (#)
    -   if it is necessary for the investigation of a crime with a
        maximum penalty of at least twe years\' imprisonment, the police
        can ask the national-security services to crack encrypted data
        (proposed art. 230-1 para. 2 - 230-5 FCCP). (#)

See the [government SSI](https://www.ssi.gouv.fr/entreprise/reglementation/controle-reglementaire-sur-la-cryptographie/) site on the applicable laws and decrees.
For former regulattions, see the (**now outdated**) [summary of the
pre-1999 French encryption
regulation](http://www.opengroup.org/security/meetings/apr98/french-regulation.pdf)
(in pdf) by Yves le Roux.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.md)
