**Version 27.0, February 2013**

**© Bert-Jaap Koops**
**Portions © Analog Devices, Inc. **  

Licensed under Creative Commons Attribution Share Alike 4.0 International.

SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0

# [Germany]{#ge} \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 1, 3, 4, 5, 7\]

## 1. Export/ import controls  
Export is regulated according to the [EU regulation](#eu_exp) and the
[Wassenaar Arrangement](#co), in the regulations as amended according to
the *General License Nr. 16* (pdf
[text](http://www.sicherheit-im-internet.de/download/ag_16.pdf) in
German, published in the [Bundesanzeiger](http://www.bundesanzeiger.de)
of 31 August 1999, in force since 1 September 1999 (earlier version in
Bundesanzeiger 32a of 15 February 1997)).

A press release of 27 August 1999 of the Ministry of Economic Affairs
specified the new export controls, which stated that export controls for
mass-market cryptography are limited to the absolute necessary.
Mass-market crypto export within the EU has already been liberalized by
the EU. Except for export to a few countries or for sensitive (military)
applications, companies can now decide themselves whether a product
falls within the category of mass-market crypto for which a general
license suffices. There is no general requirement to declare, but
exporters must be able, when requested, to hand over the specifics of
exports. When in doubt, the Federal Export Agency (BAFA) will help (see
[address](cls-addr.htm) list).

See also section 5.3 of Simo-Pekka Parviainen\'s
[thesis](http://ethesis.helsinki.fi/julkaisut/oik/julki/pg/parviainen/).\
A good article by Stefan Schuppert on Germany\'s export regulations (in
German) appeared in *Computer und Recht* 2001/7, p. 429-434.

## 2. Domestic laws and regulations  
The Amateur Radio Ordinance ([Verordnung zum Gesetz ueber den
Amateurfunk](http://www.bundesrecht.juris.de/bundesrecht/afuv_2005/gesamt.pdf))
of 15 February 2005, BGBl. 2005, 242, prohibits encryption of amateur
radio traffic \'to mystify its contents\' (zur Verschleierung des
Inhalts) (art. 16(8)). Formerly, the Ordinance required amateur
communications to be in \'plain language\', initially for international
communications (in the 1982 Order for the Radio Service Implementing the
International Teleommunications Treaty) and since 1998 also for domestic
communications. 

## 3. Developments in cryptography regulation  
On 2 June 1999, the German government announced its \"Corner points of
the German crypto policy\" ([Eckpunkte der deutschen
Kryptopolitik](http://www.bmwi.de/presse/1999/0602prm1.html)). There are
five cornerstones.

1.  The government does not intend to restrict the free availability of
    cryptography. It will actively support the spread of secure
    encryption in Germany.
2.  The government will take measures to establish a framework of trust
    for secure encryption.
3.  The government considers indispensable the ability of crypto
    manufacturers to develop secure and powerful crypto products.
4.  The spread of strong cryptography should not erode the government\'s
    interception powers. Developments will therefore be closely
    monitored, and a report will be issued after two years. Besides, the
    government will make an effort to enhance the technical competence
    of law-enforcement and security agencies.
5.  The government greatly values the international cooperation in
    crypto policy. It will advocate market-driven, open standards and
    interoperable systems.

### History of the discussions about crypto regualation  
Several politicians have expressed a desire to regulate cryptography.
There have been many conflicting rumours on the likelihood of a crypto
regulation. Interior Minister Kanther stated on 22 July 1997 that
presently, there will be no crypto law; first, one should investigate
what is technically feasible and useful. Overall, the government seemed
to lean toward an intention not to regulate cryptography.

Allegedly, the government has been considering three variants of a
crypto regulation:

1.  crypto service providers would have to store escrowed keys and if
    necessary hand these over to law-enforcement
2.  1 + marketing of encryption products would require a license
3.  1 + 2 + prohibition of non-licensed (escrowed) encryption

Federal Interior Minister Kanther stated, in a speech on 28 April 1997,
he wants to control encryption, by allowing only technologies whose
manufacturers agree to provide keys to law enforcement (this seems
option 2 in the above). In June 1997, however, the Interior Ministry
seemed to favor a two-year voluntary key-escrow approach, in which the
government would certify cryptography products which incorporate
key-escrow (which seems option 1 in the above). Use of certified
products would be voluntary. In October 1997, parliamentarian Tauss
revealed that Kanther favours a crypto chip, comparable to the US
Clipper chip, for use by the government, in order to create market
pressure to push others to use the same technology. There is little
support from industry for such an approach. The discussion over this
\"Pluto chip\" was downplayed in early 1998, when producer Siemens and
commissioner BSI (government agency for IT security) stated that the
chip did not contain a backdoor.

The German federal government was, however, itself divided over the
issue. Contrary to Kanther, the Minister of Economic Affairs
[Rexrodt](http://www.bmwi.de/reden/1997/0609rede3.html) opposed any
restriction on crypto use. Likewise, the state Ministers of Economic
Affairs in a March 1997 conference in Eltville spoke out against a ban
on cryptography. Justice Minister Schmidt-Jortzig also opposed a
restrictive crypto regulation. The initiative on Electronic Commerce
(\"[Elektronischer
Geschäftsverkehr](http://www.bmwi.de/infogesellschaft.html)\"), dated 29
October 1997, declares: \"The federal government does currently not
intend to legally regulate the marketing or use of crypto products. In
Germany, therefore, crypto systems can be freely chosen and used.\"
Ulrich Sandl, from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, said at the RSA Data
Security Conference, 13 January 1998, that GAK systems were ruled out
until at least the end of the year; moreover, he implied that use of US
key recovery products may not be in accordance with German privacy law.

In December 1996, a meeting behind closed door was apparently held by
federal and state Secretaries of State, discussing crypto regulation.
The outcome of the meeting seemed to be some proposal to regulate
cryptography: only licensed crypto could be used, and crypto
manufacturers and distributors would be required, in order to have their
products licensed, to ensure deposit of private crypto keys for
law-enforcement and national security access, as well as to deposit the
crypto source code. Distribution and use of non-licensed crypto would be
banned. However, rumours over the status of such a proposal widely
differred: some claimed that the proposal was merely a shot in the blue
to trigger reactions, others claimed it was a (preliminary) draft of a
impending regulation.

The Bavarian Secretary of Internal Affairs demanded a federal law
against conspiratorial encryption technologies in telecommunications.

In the April 1997 parliamentary debate on the Information and
Communication Services Law, the FDP explicitly spoke out against a
crypto regulation. CDU/CSU-MP Marschewski stated that encryption should
forthwith be put under a Europe-wide licensing regime. The political
party Bündnis/ Die Grünen opposes a cryptography prohibition or a
restrictive (e.g., key- escrow) regulation. The German Federal
Parliament, in a [20 June 1996
resolution](http://www.kuner.com/data/crypto/edgov04.htm), found that
effective encryption procedures may be freely chosen by participants
within the scope of the constitutional right to confidential
communication (which may be breached for internal or external security
reasons).

An interministerial Task Force on Crypto Politics was set up in October
1996 to develop concrete suggestions for an overall political strategy
on IT security until the end of 1996. The federal Minister of Economic
Affairs, in announcing the Task Force on 7 October 1996, stated that a
trade-off should be found between the equally important principles of
freely choosing cryptography and preventing criminal crypto abuse.

A Ministry of the Interior official responsible for national security,
in a November 1996 debate, appeared to favour a crypto legislation to
protect law-enforcement and national security. Although he did not think
criminals would use licensed (key-escrow) cryptography, he stated that
use of unlicensed crypto would give rise to criminal suspicion, and
would moreover facilitate traffic analysis to discover criminal
organizations.

The German Council for Research, Technology and Innovation, in a
December 1995 report on the Information Society, recommends that legal
preconditions have to be made for the decryption of documents by state
authorities, that specify the criteria for decryption competence and
unequivocally regulate the seizure of documents. The report states that
in developing and implementing cryptography products it has to be
realized that it must be possible to decrypt single documents in
relation to the execution of criminal procedure law.

A conference of Justice Ministers in December 1995 expressed concern
that law enforcement is not keeping pace with technological
developments. Federal Minister of Justice Schmidt-Jortzig acknowledges
the problem of law enforcement, but doubts that an encryption
prohibition could be enforced. Moreover, a German regulation would be
inadequate to deal with the global matter of cryptography. In March
1997, at a conference of his FDP party, he called demands to ban
cryptography deeply illiberal.

In its policy document [*Info 2000: Deutschlands Weg in die
Informationsgesellschaft*](http://www.kp.dlr.de/BMWi/gip/programme/info2000/),
the German government supported the European Commission\'s [ETS
initiative](#eu). A focal point was promoting encryption to protect
confidential information by network operators. \"In this respect the
legal preconditions for the decryption by state bodies are to be
examined.\" As regards the fight against crime, \"dangerous gaps\" in
law enforcement\'s ability through criminals\' use of encryption should
be stopped as soon as possible. \"Where this should not be possible with
the available methods, new forms also of technical information provision
should be considered, to not let crime get a lead.\" The deployment of
criminal law means should be considered only as an \"ultima ratio\".

The Enquiry Committee \"Future of the media\" of the German Parliament
recommended in 1998 not to restrict cryptography. \"The capabilities of
users to protect themselves through cryptography should, given the
current state of understanding, not be legally restricted. A restriction
of the free use of such techniques can not, in this understanding, be
justified in a cost-benefit analysis.\" (BT/DS 13/11002, recommendation
13)

Magazine \"Der Spiegel\" reported on 8 January 1996 that the German
Ministry of the Interior is working on a draft law which would prohibit
(unescrowed?) cryptography. It published [another
article](http://www.iks-jena.de/mitarb/lutz/security/spiegel.en.html) in
December 1996 on impending restrictive legislation (see above).

See Ulf Moeller\'s [Kryptographie: Rechtliche
Situation](http://www.thur.de/ulf/krypto/verbot.html) (in German), an
[action page](http://www.crypto.de) by Nicolas Reichelt with many
newspaper articles (in German), and [more
documents](http://www.kuner.com/data/crypto/crypto.html) collected by
Christopher Kuner (mostly in English), including a list of [opinions of
political parties](http://www.kuner.com/data/crypto/edgov02.htm) (in
English). There is also an extensive [list of opinions and newspaper
reports](http://www.iks-jena.de/mitarb/lutz/security/cryptoban/) by Lutz
Donnerhacke.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.md)
