**Version 27.0, February 2013**

**© Bert-Jaap Koops**
**Portions © Analog Devices, Inc. **  

Licensed under Creative Commons Attribution Share Alike 4.0 International.

SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0

## [Singapore]{#si} \[[Source](cls-srce.htm) 5, 10\]

**1. Export/ import controls**\
Export is covered by [Wassenaar](#Wassenaar) controls. See the
[Strategic Goods (Control)
Act](http://www.stgc.gov.sg/stgc/index.jsp?url=/html/4_Legislation.html&artName=78&catName=46),
in force since 1 January 2003, and the [Strategic Goods (Control)
Regulations](http://www.stgc.gov.sg/stgc/index.jsp?url=/html/4_Legislation.html&artName=78&catName=46),
gazetted on 5 January 2004; the latter contains, among other things,
provisions on electronic transmission of technology. See generally the
[Strategic Goods Control](http://www.stgc.gov.sg/stgc/index.jsp)
website. 

Formerly, there were import restrictions (requiring a license from the
Trade Development Board), but these were abolished on 21 January 2000.

**2. Domestic laws and regulations**\
There are no domestic controls on crypto use, but according to the
Singapore Trade Development Board, \"hardware equipment that will be
connected directly to the telecommunications infrastructure will require
approval from the Telecommunications Authority (TA) of Singapore. This
is to ensure compliance and non-interference with telecommunications
requirements.\" \[source: [EPIC survey
2000](http://www2.epic.org/reports/crypto2000/countries.html#Heading108)\]

There is a general decryption order for offences in the Criminal
Procedure Code. Originally, the decryption order was introduced in art.
15 of the Computer Misuse Act, as amended in 1998 and in force since 27
February 1999, and restricted to offences under the Computer Misuse Act.
In 2005, by the [Statutes (Miscellaneous Amendments) (No. 2) Act
2005](http://app.supremecourt.gov.sg/data/doc/ManageHighlights/366/Statutes%20(Miscellaneous%20Amendments)%20(No%202)%20Act%202005.htm)
(No. 42 of 2005), the provision was transferred to a new art. 125B of
the Criminal Procedure Code (Cap. 68, 1985 Ed.), and could be applied to
all seizable offences. With the re-enactment of the Criminal Procedure
Code by Act 15 of 2010, the provision was moved to s. 40 and applies to
all arrestable offences. Section 40 of the [Criminal Procedure
Code](http://statutes.agc.gov.sg/aol/search/display/view.w3p;page=0;query=CompId:438d3ac1-0aa5-419a-a283-55122e09c04e;rec=0;resUrl=http://statutes.agc.gov.sg/aol/browse/titleResults.w3p;letter=C;type=actsAll)
(Cap. 68, Revised Edition 2012, available at
<http://statutes.agc.gov.sg/>) allows the Public Prosecutor to authorise
the police (or another authorised person) to \"access any information,
code or technology which has the capability of retransforming or
unscrambling encrypted data into readable and comprehensible format or
text for the purposes of investigating the seizable offence\", or to
require computer users (those reasonably suspected of using or having
used a computer in connection with a seizable offence, as well as
persons concerned with operating such a computer) \"to provide him with
such reasonable technical and other assistance\" to get access to
decryption information. Moreover, they are entitled to require any
person reaonably suspected to possess decryption information to grant
\"access to such decryption information necessary to decrypt data
required for the purposes of investigating the seizableoffence\".
Failing to comply with these orders is punishable with at most S\$10,000
or three years\' imprisonment. If, however, \"it is shown that the
encrypted data contains evidence relevant to the planning, preparation
or commission of a specified serious offence\", he can be punished with
the same punishment as applies to that offence, with a maximum of
S\$50,000 or ten years\' imprisonment. The list of specified offences,
in s. 40(5), refers to many national-security-related laws, but also to
kidnapping or \"any written law which provides for any offence involving
the causing of death or bodily harm\" (if the maximum of that offence is
at least 5 years\' imprisonment).

**3. Developments in cryptography regulation**\
The Infocomm Development Authority of Singapore [press
release](http://www.ida.gov.sg/Website/IDAContent.nsf/dd1521f1e79ecf3bc825682f0045a340/b862cb2072335c19c825686b003b85a9?OpenDocument)
of 19 January 2000 that announced the lifting of import controls,
strongly encouraged companies to implement key recovery.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.html#toc)
