**Version 27.0, February 2013**

**© Bert-Jaap Koops**
**Portions © Analog Devices, Inc. **  

Licensed under Creative Commons Attribution Share Alike 4.0 International.

SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0

# [South Africa]{#sa} \[[Sources](../sources.md) 1, 3, 5\]

## 1. Export/ import controls  
There are import and export controls for military cryptography, as
regulated by the Defense Armaments Development and Protection Act 1968,
No. R. 888, published May 13, 1994, and the General Armaments Control
Schedule. Import of cryptography from military suppliers abroad and
export of cryptography from military suppliers in South Africa are
controlled (a military supplier being a company who has developed the
technology specifically for sale to governments such as a government
military contractor). Otherwise crypto import and export is free.

## 2. Domestic laws and regulations  
Use of encryption is free for commercial or private organizations.

The provision of cryptography products or services, however, is strictly
regulated through Chapter V of the [Electronic Communications and
Transactions Act](http://www.internet.org.za/ect_act.html) of 31 July
2002, in force since 30 August 2002, and the implementing Cryptography
Regulations of 10 March 2006 (*Government Gazette* No. 28594). 

The Act has a broad scope: it includes the provision of cryptography
within South Africa, but also the provision to someone who is in South
Africa when he uses it, and to a person who uses it for the purpose of a
business carried on in South Africa. Thus, it includes providing
cryptography through the Internet to South Africans, providing crypto to
foreign subsidiaries of SA companies, and providing crypto to persons
who at one time or other will visit SA from abroad if they will use the
crypto within the country. (For a further discussion of the scope, see
the
[article](http://www.deneysreitz.co.za/pdf/news/WITHOUT%20PREJUDICE%2001%20May%202006%20Page%2028_29.pdf)
*Decoding the ECTA Cryptography Regulations* by Louw & Augustine.)\
Crypto providers can only operate after they have been registered, for
which they have to provide the registration authority (the
Director-General of the Department of Communications) with the
information required (art. 29-30 Act + additional information listed in
Art. 2 Regulations, including \'detailed profiles of trusted personnel\'
with \'supervisory or managerial responsibilities\'), and pay an
application and annual administration fee (art. 4 Regulations). The
providers have to disclose information to relevant authorities
investigating a crime, security agencies or cyber-inspectors (art.
31(2)). Violation of the law is punishable with up to two years\'
imprisonment (art. 32(2)).\
A draft version of the Regulations, the 1 September 2004 Notice inviting
Comment on Proposed Cryptography Regulations, also included as
information to be provided contact details of all customers to whom a
crypto product or service was provided in the preceding 6 months (art.
2(b)(vi), but this was struck in the final Regulations.

Before the ECT Act, there were some specific regulations that may still
apply. Use or supply of telecommunications facilities or equipment must
first be approved by [ICASA](http://www.icasa.org.za), the Independent
Communications Authority of South Africa (formerly SATRA), except on
explicit prescription by ICASA. This does not apply if the device is
connected between a modem or router and the computer. It is unclear
whether and to what extent \"telecommunications facilities or
equipment\" covers cryptography.\
Use or provision of cryptography by government bodies requires approval
from the relevant agency; likewise, crypto systems approved for
government use require approval from the relevant agency to be used by
commercial or private organizations.

Apart from restricting crypto services, there is also a power for the
police to demand decryption in case of encrypted telecommunications. The
[Regulation of Interception of Communications and Provision of
Communication-Related Information
Act](http://www.internet.org.za/ricpci.html) (No. 70, 2002), published
in the *Government Gazette* on 22 January 2003, gives the police the
power to request a designated judge to give a decryption direction (art.
21). This is possible before or during interception of
telecommunications according to the act. The addressee has to comply by
giving the decryption key or by providing decryption assistance (art.
29). Costs for decryption can be compensated (art. 31). Failure to
comply is punishable with a fine of up to 2 million Rand or imprisonment
of maximum 10 years for natural persons and employees, or a fine of 5
million Rand for organisations (juristic persons) (art. 51(4)). Numerous
detailed provisions and conditions apply, see articles 1, 21 and 29.
(Cf. also [Discussion Paper
99](http://wwwserver.law.wits.ac.za/salc/discussn/dp99.pdf) by the South
African Law Commission on Computer-related crime (also at
[2600](http://www.2600.co.za/articles/dp99.pdf)), which was to lead to a
Computer Misuse Act, but which has in the meantime been addressed by the
ECT Act and the RICPCRI Act. Section 4.5.3 under 4(b) of the report
proposed search and seizure powers, including the requiring of any
person concerned with a computer or computer data to provide \"the
reasonable assistance that may be required to facilitate the execution\"
of the search warrant.)

## 3. Developments in cryptography regulation  
None.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.md)
