**Version 27.0, February 2013**

**© Bert-Jaap Koops**
**Portions © Analog Devices, Inc. **  

Licensed under Creative Commons Attribution Share Alike 4.0 International.

SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0

# [Wassenaar Arrangement]{#co} / COCOM \[[Sources](cls-srce.htm) 1, 5\]

## 1. Export/ import controls

### COCOM

COCOM (Coordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls) was an
international organization for the mutual control of the export of
strategic products and technical data from country members to proscribed
destinations. It maintained, among others, the International Industrial
List and the International Munitions List. In 1991, COCOM decided to
allow export of mass-market cryptographic software (including public
domain software). Most member countries of COCOM followed its
regulations, but the United States maintained separate regulations.

Its 17 members were Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France,
Germany, Greece, Italy, Japan, Luxemburg, The Netherlands, Norway,
Portugal, Spain, Turkey, United Kingdom, and the United States.
Cooperating members included Austria, Finland, Hungary, Ireland, New
Zealand, Poland, Singapore, Slovakia, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland,
and Taiwan.

The main goal of the COCOM regulations was to prevent cryptography from
being exported to \"dangerous\" countries - usually, the countries
thought to maintain friendly ties with terrorist organizations, such as
Libya, Iraq, Iran, and North Korea. Exporting to other countries is
usually allowed, although states often require a license to be granted.

COCOM was dissolved in March 1994. Pending the signing of a new treaty,
most members of COCOM agreed in principle to maintain the status quo,
and cryptography remained on export control lists.

#### [Wassenaar]{#Wassenaar} Arrangement

The Wassenaar Arrangement controls the export of weapons and of dual-use
goods, that is, goods that can be used both for a military and for a
civil purpose; cryptography is such a dual-use good.

In 1995, 28 countries decided to establish a follow-up to COCOM, the
*Wassenaar Arrangement on Export Controls for Conventional Arms and
Dual-Use Goods and Technologies*. The negotiations on the Arrangement
were finished in July 1996, and the agreement was signed by 31 countries
(Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Romania, the Russian Federation, the
Slovak Republic, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, the United Kingdom
and the United States). Later, Bulgaria and Ukraine also became a
participating state to the Arrangement.

The initial provisions were largely the same as old COCOM regulations.
The General Software Note (applicable until the December 1998 revision)
excepted mass-market and public-domain crypto software from the
controls. Australia, France, New Zealand, Russia, and the US deviated
from the GSN and controlled the export of mass-market and public-domain
crypto software. Export via the Internet did not seem to be covered by
the regulations.

There is a personal-use exemption, allowing export of products
\"accompanying their user for the user\'s personal use\" (e.g., on a
laptop).

In September 1998, Wassenaar negotiations in Vienna did not lead to
changes in the crypto controls, although it was apparently considered to
restrict the GSN and possibly also to ease controls for key-recovery
crypto.

The Wassenaar Arrangement was revised in December 1998. Negotiations
were held on 2 and 3 December 1998 in Vienna, which resulted in
restrictions on the General Software Note and in some relexations:

-   free for export are: all symmetric crypto products of up to 56 bits,
    all asymmetric crypto products of up to 512 bits, and all
    subgroup-based crypto products (including elliptic curve) of up to
    112 bits;
-   mass-market symmetric crypto software and hardware of up to 64 bits
    are free for export (the 64-bit limit was deleted on 1 December
    2000, see below);
-   the export of products that use encryption to protect intellectual
    property (such as DVDs) is relaxed;
-   export of all other crypto still requires a license.

There was no change in the provisions on public-domain crypto, so that
all public-domain crypto software is still free for export. Nothing was
said about electronic exports (e.g., via the Internet), which
consequently remain unclear.

In its meeting of 30 November-1 December 2000, the Wassenaar states
lifted the 64-bit limit for export controls on mass-market crypto
software and hardware (in the Cryptography Note, clause d. (the 64-bit
limit) was deleted in its reference to category 5A2, as well as the
related Validity Note, see the
[summary](http://www.wassenaar.org/list/Summary.html)). The [public
statement](http://www.wassenaar.org/docs/press_5.html) of the meeting
mentioned that \"Participating States recognised that it is important to
continue deepening Wassenaar Arrangement understanding of how and how
much to control\" intangible transfers.

The Wassenaar provisions are not directly applicable: each member state
has to implement them in national legislation for them to have effect.
(In the entries below, I have included mention of the pre-December 1998
regulations, which will stay into effect until the government enacts new
legislation to implement the Wassenaar changes.)

See the [Wassenaar
List](http://www.wassenaar.org/list/Table%20of%20Contents%20-%2099web.html)
(crypto is in category 5 part 2). See further the [Wassenaar
Arrangement](http://www.wassenaar.org) page (includes contact
information for various national export control authorities), a
[Wassenaar FAQ](http://www.bis.doc.gov/Wassenaar/WASSFAQs.htm) (by US
BIS), Greg Broiles\' [page on the Wassenaar
Arrangement](http://www.parrhesia.com/wassenaar/), which includes links
to [John Young\'s](http://www.jya.com/wassenr3.htm) pages on the
Wassenaar Arrangement and [comments](http://jya.com/wass-talk.htm) on
the December 1998 changes, and the [GILC Wassenaar
page](http://www.gilc.org/crypto/wassenaar/). See also Chapter 3 of
Simo-Pekka Parviainen\'s
[thesis](http://ethesis.helsinki.fi/julkaisut/oik/julki/pg/parviainen/)
on Cryptographic Software Export Controls in the EU. Cf. an April 1996
[article](http://www.dfat.gov.au/isecurity/pd/pd_4_96/pd10.html) on the
Wassenaar Arrangement.

Back to the [Table of Contents](index.md)
